the allies after nassau in december 1960, the u.s . first
proposed to help nato develop its own nuclear strike force . but europe
made no attempt to devise a plan . last week, as they studied the
nassau accord between president kennedy and prime minister macmillan,
europeans saw emerging the first outlines of the nuclear nato that the
u.s . wants and will support . it all sprang from the anglo-u.s .
crisis over cancellation of the bug-ridden skybolt missile, and the
u.s . offer to supply britain and france with the proved polaris (time,
dec . 28) . the one allied leader who unreservedly welcomed the polaris
offer was harold macmillan, who by thus keeping a separate nuclear
deterrent for britain had saved his own neck . back from nassau, the
prime minister beamed that britain now had a weapon that " will last a
generation . the terms are very good . " many other britons were not so
sure . though the government will shoulder none of the $800 million
development cost of polaris, it has already poured $28 million into
skybolt and will have to spend perhaps $1 billion more for a fleet of
missile-packing submarines . at best, the british will not be able to
design, build and prove its nuclear fleet before 1970, three years
after britain's bomber force has presumably become obsolete . then what
? tory backbenchers are loudly skeptical of what they call " the
small type " in the nassau pact, which stipulates that britain's
polaris submarine fleet, except when " supreme national interests "
intervene, must be committed to a truly multilateral nato force . does
that mean that britain will eventually have no strike force of its own
? who will decide when or whether national interests justify
withdrawal of submarines from nato, particularly if those national
interests conflict with u.s . policy ? the biggest question of all is
whether france's inclusion in the offer was a deliberate ploy by jack
kennedy to end or at least downgrade britain's prized " special
relationship " with the u.s . the cartoonists went even farther . they
not only showed supermac jumping to superjack's commands, but de gaulle
and adenauer as well . as edith said . the french, who got no help from
the u.s . in developing their force de frappe, were quick to crow that
britain's vaunted ties with the u.s . had brought it nothing but
humiliation . by contrast, bragged french officials, the skybolt fiasco
only vindicated france's decision to develop its own bombs and delivery
systems . thus, though charles de gaulle promised to " reflect " on the
polaris offer, there was little likelihood that he would accept any
offer that would subject a french force to allied control . it is de
gaulle's unswerving conviction that if the russians were actually to
invade western europe, no nation that was not directly attacked meaning
the u.s . would invite nuclear devastation by helping its allies . thus
unlike britain's bomber force, which all along has been pledged to "
the western strategic deterrent, " france's force de frappe will be
responsible only for france's defense . at the same time, de gaulle has
long argued that the atlantic alliance could be run most efficiently by
a triumvirate that would include france as an equal of the u.s . and
britain . this is one of his major, if unspoken, conditions for british
membership in the common market ; and de gaulle suggested pointedly to
macmillan that it would help if britain were to share its advanced
missile technology with france . when macmillan replied noncommittally
that he would have to discuss this with kennedy, de gaulle told his
guest with hauteur that france in that case could do nothing to ease
britain's entry into europe . go-it-alone grandeur . konrad adenauer,
on the other hand, is fearful that de gaulle will snap up the polaris
offer and in this way achieve his goal of a three-nation nato
directorate . though his government vowed in 1954 not to manufacture
nuclear weapons, adenauer has become increasingly apprehensive that
without them, and with no say in their use, west germany will be
relegated to second-class citizenship in the alliance . last week an
official bulletin even revived the old, bitter cry that u.s . pleas for
greater reliance on conventional forces are aimed at raising german "
cannon fodder " for u.s . " atomic knights . " a frosty letter from the
chancellor to president kennedy suggested that germany, which already
supplies almost 50 per cent of nato ground strength, does not intend to
raise any more divisions for conventional warfare . yet u.s . strategic
planners reason that the only credible deterrent to soviet attack is a
strong army on the ground, backed by the vast u.s . nuclear arsenal .
fact is, the british and french nuclear weapons could never be used
independently of the u.s . against russia without inviting devastating
soviet retaliation . after all their efforts, the british and french
will have managed to create a nuclear capacity that represents only 4
per cent of u.s . nuclear power . " it is just a damned nuisance, "
said a state department official last week . " it means nothing
militarily except that we will be expected to bail out the first
country that throws the first pea at the russians or anyone else . "
charles de gaulle could hardly be expected to agree, at least until his
force de frappe becomes obsolete . for britain and germany, the
multilateral deterrent makes immediate sense . eventually, france, too,
may well find a nato-controlled polaris fleet, or its possible
successor, a european minuteman arsenal, the only answer to the
spiraling cost and diminishing value of go-it-alone grandeur .
