middle east spreading infection in the
middle east, revolution is reaching epidemic proportions . a revolt in
yemen last september ousted the centuries-old dynasty of the imam and
installed a " republic " that has ever since been propped up by 20,000
egyptian troops sent in by gamal abdel nasser . in two bloody days'
work last month, iraqi army officers deposed and killed psychotic
dictator abdul karim kassem . last week, on a quiet, grey friday
morning, the infection reached syria . broken bonds . everyone knew it
was coming, from syria's strongman, general abdel karim zahreddin, down
to the lowliest private in the army . when zahreddin severed syria's
union with egypt 17 months ago, he had profited from the nation's
revulsion against the police state and harsh economic controls imposed
by nasser . but syrians, passionate believers in arab unity, also felt
guilty about breaking the bonds . wispy president nazem el-koudsi
sighed, " the trouble with syrians is that we are never concerned with
just our own problems but with issues affecting all arabs . " the
regime survived three major and countless minor conspiracies, but once
iraq rebelled against dictator kassem in the name of arab unity, the
syrian regime was doomed . six cabinet ministers resigned discreetly,
and when members of the baath (renaissance) party were asked to replace
them, they refused . desperate president koudsi eagerly offered to
unite syria with the new revolutionary government of iraq but received
no official reply from baghdad . schools were closed to prevent student
demonstrations against the government, and tanks and armored cars
patrolled the streets of damascus . the revolution came as quietly as a
sunrise . general zahreddin suspected colonel mohammed hariri, chief of
the southern front command, of being a top conspirator and ordered him
sent out of the country as military attache to jordan . hariri refused
to go, and the entire southern command backed him up . an armored
column moved out from the badani military camp and entered damascus,
where the tanks patrolling the streets quickly joined the rebels .
scarcely a shot was fired as syria changed its allegiance . tempers
were so cool that president koudsi was allowed to remain at home with
his family . premier khaled el-azm, who lived beside the turkish
embassy, simply slipped next door and was given political asylum .
damascus radio went on the air proclaiming the baathist slogans of "
unity, freedom, socialism ! " a jubilant syrian army officer at a
border post said, " we want unity, not with nasser, but with all arabs
. " as in iraq, the syrian national council of the revolutionary
command insisted on anonymity . the new 20-man cabinet has only two
military men, and the baath party is strongly represented . new premier
salah el-bitar, 45, is a former syrian foreign minister and a baathist
with strong sympathies toward arab unity . a tall, hulking damascene
with dark, brooding eyes and brilliantined hair, he once signed a
manifesto denouncing union with egypt, but later advocated close
federal ties .
two in one . two revolutions within a
single month have thus put the baathists into power in two nations
stretching from the mediterranean to the persian gulf . the baath party
strongly emphasizes unity with all arab states, including egypt, but
rejects dictatorship by anyone, including nasser . its philosophy calls
for ittihad, loose federation, and pledges overall allegiance to uruba,
a pervasive panarabism . when news of the syrian revolt reached the
iraqi capital of baghdad, a military parade was transformed into a
victory celebration, with long lines of citizens and students
snake-dancing through the city . in cairo, nasser's men hailed the new
syrian regime . it seems probable that nasser will profit from his past
mistakes and settle for a coalition of " liberated " arab states
governed by baathists and pro-nasserites but retaining their separate
identities and sovereignties . the revolutionary wave next threatens
the monarchies of jordan and saudi arabia, which have bitterly opposed
nasser's intervention in yemen and have no love for the unity proposals
of the baath party . the beleaguered kingdoms last week seemed to be
girding for a last-ditch stand . king hussein alerted his arab legion,
the most efficient fighting force in the arab world . prince feisal,
premier of saudi arabia, protested that egyptian planes had bombed
saudi towns on the yemen border and angrily declared, " let the world
know that we are not afraid of war . we saudis are indeed the children
of war . if we have to die, then let us die with honor . unless these
attacks, provocations and childish acts end, then this country will
turn the tables and turn the aggressors head over heels . " positive
way . the united nations' special envoy to the middle east, dr . ralph
bunche, last week visited the republican areas of yemen as part of the
u.n . effort to prevent the arkansas-sized nation from becoming an
international battleground . yemen had delayed bunche's visit until an
egyptian armored column could seize the formerly royalist-held town of
marib, and then exhibited it to bunche as evidence of republican
control of the country . after a 60-minute session with yemen's
strongman abdullah sallal, bunche declared, " i was most impressed by
his earnestness, sincerity, strength and seriousness of purpose . "
stopping off in cairo on his way home,
bunche conferred for two hours with nasser, then saw newsmen . he
emphasized that the yemeni people he saw supported sallal's government
/ in a positive way . " the radio voice of the royalist tribesmen
fighting to restore the imam plaintively begged bunche to visit the
areas they controlled " and see the real truth see the roads, ravines
and mountains of yemen littered with egyptian dead . " but, on this
trip at least, ralph bunche was satisfied to draw his conclusions from
one side only . later, the u.n . let it be known that he plans to visit
the imam on a separate journey in the near future . hard look . in
1958, the last time there was a big revolutionary crisis in the middle
east, the u.s . rushed 14,000 marines and troops to lebanon . last week
the u.s . role was far more ambivalent . washington sent a message to
nasser expressing " grave concern " at continued egyptian bombing of
saudi arabia . instead of marines, the u.s . sent veteran diplomat
ellsworth bunker to saudi arabia to reassure the understandably nervous
prince feisal . u.s . policy seems aimed at safeguarding the
territorial integrity of jordan and saudi arabia from aggression beyond
their borders, not in maintaining the monarchs in power against their
own people . in israel, premier david bengurion interrupted a vacation
to confer with his defense chiefs . the revolution in syria is unlikely
to be the final firecracker on the string . baathist and nasserite
elements are known to be at work in jordan, especially among the
palestinian arabs . saudi arabia can no longer trust its small air
force or even the officer corps of its regular army . if it comes to
fighting, the saudi rulers will depend on their " white army, " the
bedouin tribesmen traditionally loyal to the king . but if the road
ahead looks rough for the monarchies, it by no means is smooth for the
/ liberated " states, since victory most often presents only new
occasions for quarrels, in keeping with the arab proverb that says, " i
and my brother against my cousin ; i and my cousin against the
foreigner . /
