france to the mines ! for all the excited headlines,
s.a.o . terrorism was hardly charles de gaulle's main concern last week
. far graver was the challenge to his authority posed by france's
economy . it took the form of a spreading labor strike led by 188,000
stubborn miners concentrated in the grim coal districts of northern
france . three rival unions (roman catholic, socialist, communist) were
out of the pits in a joint demand for a 12 per cent pay boost to
compensate for the creeping inflation that has wiped out much of their
purchasing power in the past three years . de gaulle's reply was in the
authoritarian tradition of an angry old soldier . he put his signature
to a special decree that has the effect of drafting the strikers into
the national serviceorders can be signed by the premier ; by issuing
it himself, de gaulle put his own prestige on the line against the
strikers . as strategists, the miners turned out to be worthy opponents
. though tempted to strike earlier because of the swiftly rising cost
of living, the miners held off until france's coal stocks had been used
up by the bitter cold of the past months . when the strike was only a
few days old, factories began to shut down from lack of fuel . support
for the miners came from all sides . roman catholic bishop gerard
huyghe of arras publicly stated that their conditions must be improved
. in paris, 3,000 university students demonstrated for the strikers,
shouting " de gaulle to the mines ! " the wine dealers association
promised to send 2,600 gallons of red wine to the beer-drinking miners
. other unions pulled short sympathy strikes : railroad workers quit
for 15 minutes ; gas and electric workers walked out for two hours,
stalling subways, stopping work in factories, trapping some unwary
citizens in elevators between floors . de gaulle's requisition order
iself was responsible for much of the sympathy for the miners . under
last week's decree, failure to return to work can be punished by
dismissal, fines and, under certain conditions, jail terms . a coal
cutter in lens said : " we were striking for money and shorter hours,
but now we're striking for the right to strike . " at week's end
premier georges pompidou took his case to the people in a nationwide
television broadcast, urging the miners to return to work to protect "
the life and prosperity of the nation . " he was still standing firm on
money : " the reasonable rhythm of salary increases prohibits giving
the miners what they ask . " all the government would promise was a 5.7
per cent boost spread over ten months .
