communists on the anniversary after stalin's 70th birthday in
1949, it took pravda 22 months to print all the names of his
well-wishers . last week, on the tenth anniversary of the tyrant's
death, there was not a single mention by press or radio of the man
nikita khrushchev once fulsomely praised as " our great leader, our
friend and father, the greatest man of our epoch . " in all of moscow's
millions, only a single anonymous soul dared to pay respects with three
rubles worth of yellow mimosa on stalin's black marble slab near the
kremlin wall iny albania, seizing any excuse to defy the soviets, was
gushing stalin's praise . all over the country, monuments to the dead
dictator were hung with garlands of flowers ; tirana newspapers
published his picture and babbled their " love and profound respect for
his teachings . " red china might also have been expected to use the
occasion to glorify stalin's memory, but remembering the dictator's
open distrust of his asian comrades, peking chose not to be
hypocritical . instead, mao tse-tung took the occasion to launch his
toughest, most strident blast at moscow since the sino-soviet squabble
began . a 60,000-word broadside in peking's theoretical journal red
flag declared : " certain people, though calling themselves
marxist-leninists, are in fact muddleheaded ; they talk drivel . . .
they either make endless concessions to the enemy and thus commit the
error of capitulationism, or act recklessly and thus commit the error
of adventurism . " peking added contemptuously that communists like
russia's khrushchev, italy's togliatti and france's thorez, who
advocated " peaceful " revolution in the west, were guilty of "
parliamentary cretinism . " red china's new tone made the squabble for
supremacy in the communist world sound all but irreconcilable . " if it
is a case of masters wielding clubs over the heads of servants, calling
for unity, then what is actually meant is a split, " declared red flag
. switching to another metaphor, peking intoned ominously that " now
there are two watches " by which communists can tell the time . " which
is to be the master watch ? " moscow did not shout back last week ;
but it could not long remain silent, lest khrushchev appear to be the "
coward " that mao now called him . now that the chinese reds have
nailed their theses to the kremlin wall, some men in moscow would be
thinking of excommunication . stalin's posthumous excommunication took
only three years to accomplish, and already the sino-soviet quarrel has
rages for longer than that .
