east africa the asians in their midst for many european settlers,
/ africa for the africans " simply means packing up and going home,
painful though it may be . the future is far darker for the asians in
east africa, who have long formed a precarious middle class . despised
by color-conscious whites, whom they greatly outnumber (400,000 to
96,000), resented by east africa's 25 million blacks, the asians mostly
indians and pakistanis are loath to return to homelands that few have
seen, and where jobs are already critically scarce . for the great
majority of asians, there is no other alternative but to stay on in an
increasingly hostile africa where, as one western diplomat succinctly
said recently, they are " the hard upper rung against which the rising
african bumps his head . " exporting profits . though they have been
trading on the east coast of africa for centuries, most of east
africa's asians have taken root in this alien land only since 1895,
when the british brought in 32,000 indian workmen to build the
narrow-guage railway that opened the interior to colonization . asian
quickly turned from railroad building to trade, and so completely
dominated commerce that until 1919 the rupee was the official currency
of east africa . today, millionaire indian merchants and manufacturers
occupy some of nairobi's finest homes ; but the asians are for the
most part small shopkeepers duka wallahs to the africans and junior
civil servants, who have never found middleclass security in their
middle-class vocations . african nationalists have long complained that
the asians are a clannish, alien people whose only interest in africa
lies in the profits to be wrung from african customers . " the indians
are opportunists and quislings, " cries nyasaland's prime minister
hastings banda . " everywhere in the country they are taking business
from african businessmen . " the asians make a habit of shipping much
of their profit out of africa ; african politicians charged bitterly
last fall that their true loyalty was disclosed by the sums of money
that they raised for india during the border war with china . three
years ago, half of the asian merchants in uganda's buganda kingdom were
driven out of the country by a wave of ugly violence and a boycott of
asian shops . east africans were cheered last week by the departure
from mozambique of the last batch of 4,600 indians deported to their
homeland by portuguese authorities in revenge for india's 1961 takeover
of goa . in tanganyika, all 6,000 asian civil servants will lose their
jobs as soon as enough africans can be found to replace them . african
leadership . in kenya, when ex-mau mau detainees returned to their
villages after rehabilitation courses in british camps, they used their
new knowledge of basic economics to take over rural trading posts from
the long-hated asians . lately, kenya's indian merchants have
contributed heavily to both big african political parties in hopes of
buying protection after kenya gets uhuru (freedom) . kenya's
nationalist leader tom mboya is one of the few politicians to pledge
that his kenya african national union will permit not one to be "
victimized on grounds of race, color, tribe or religion . " but even
mboya adds blandly, " we of course wish to see asians and other
non-africans adapt themselves to the new order by accepting african
leadership and african government . /
