senegal only one hat three months ago, in a bitter end to a
beautiful friendship, poet-president leopold senghor of peanut-growing
senegal, on the west african coast, booted out of office his old
friend, premier mamadou dia, after dia had turned on senghor in an
attempted coup . last week, in a referendum run off while dia
languished behind the barbed wire of a military camp outside dakar
awaiting trial for treason, the 56-year-old senghor legalized his
position as senegal's strongman . while pro-senghor demonstrators
chanted, " a single hat on a single head, " more than 1,000,000
senegalese, shuffled to the polls and handed senghor a 99.5 per cent
oui on a new senghor-tailored constitution . true to the slogan, the
new charter scraps senegal's two-man, president-premier system in favor
of a single, strong presidency for senghor . the victory was resounding
proof of senghor's support among senegal's masses, and it is made all
the more impressive by the fact that he is a roman catholic in a 70 per
cent moslem land . but the outcome was also, in a sense, a painful
defeat for black africa's most distinguished intellectual . for it had
been the bespectacled senghor who originally installed senegal's
two-headed system of divided powers after leading the country into
independence 2f years ago . until he and dia fell out, french-oriented
senghor loftily ridiculed other french african nations that had chosen
one-man rule . now, whatever his continuing popularity at home, senghor
has probably lost some of his effectiveness as the leading spokesman
for political liberalism in former french africa . the brilliant
senghor's intellectual credentials are impressive indeed . his
muchdiscussed poetic works include chants d'ombre, ethiopiques and
nocturnes . with martinique's poet aime cesaire, senghor founded the
mystic philosophy of " negritude . " senghor was the first african ever
to win france's coveted agregation de grammaire academic degree, and he
served with distinction as a territorial member of the postwar french
national assembly . by all accounts, he has been brooding over the
political circumstances which forced him to end his 17-year friendship
with dia and take over as strongman . but senghor was not likely to let
his sense of guilt get him down . he is, after all, a strong admirer of
charles de gaulle, and modeled his new constitution partly on de
gaulle's design for the fifth republic in paris . perhaps with his
mentor in mind, senghor conceded in one of his poems that " absolute
power requires the blood of the most dear being . " in any case, by
week's end he had grandly christened senegal's new regime, " la
deuxieme republique .
his wife colette, an attractive woman in her 30s, is from normandy .
