the congo the u.n . drives implacably ahead belgian
cement worker albert verbrugghe was driving his wife and another woman
down a quiet street in the copper town of jadotville one day last week,
when he suddenly heard the clatter of gunfire . pulling the triggers
for no apparent reason were nervous indian troops of the advancing
united nations force . verbrugghe slammed his little volkswagen to a
halt . his wife was already dead, the other woman dying . with an
anguished scream, verbrugghe stumbled out, blood streaming from a wound
under his eye . " my wife is killed, " he cried . " why, why, why ? "
the same question, in a larger context, was being asked in many
capitals last week . for the third time in 15 months, the world was
horrified witness to the spectacle of foreign soldiers, aided by the
u.s., seizing the towns and firing on native soldiers of the congo . to
many, the u.n.'s very presence in the african land was of doubtful
wisdom . but in any case, the blazing guns and swooping planes of the
u.n . hardly fitted the pacifying intent of its original congo mandate
. " it is an unspeakable tragedy, " said connecticut's democratic
senator thomas dodd, " that the world organization which was set up to
prevent war and preserve the peace should be starting wars . " in
london, 90 tory m.p.s accused the u.n . of acting " contrary to its own
charter . " even president kennedy, who last week ordered the u.s . to
begin shipping 2f-ton trucks, armored cars and transport planes to the
u.n . congo force, was reported to be alarmed at the disorder that
arose from the u.n . shooting . on to jadotville . but there was no
turning back on the basic decision that had been made . katanga's
secessionist president moise tshombe had used every sly trick in the
book to frustrate efforts to reunite his rebellious,
copperrich province with the rest of the congo . now, u.n .
secretary-general u thant, with u.s . encouragement, was determined to
end the katanga problem once and for all . the occasion happened to be
the collapse of discipline among tshombe's boozy, ragtag 20,000-man
gendarmerie . when they began shooting at u.n . soldiers in katanga a
fortnight ago, the u.n . replied with all the power at its command .
last week irish infantrymen marched into kipushi, site of copper mines
at the rhodesian border . ethiopian u.n troops already occupied
elisabethville itself . but the big prize was jadotville, a town of
90,000, where the giant union miniere mineral
outfit produces one-third of its copper (110,000 tons) and
three-fourths of its cobalt (6,600 tons) each year . toward jadotville,
70 miles from elisabethville, moved a two-mile-long column of indians
commanded by brigadier reginald noronha, a gutty soldier who munched
hardboiled eggs while mortar shells burst around him . weapons afloat .
alarmed at the prospect of damage to mine installations in which both
britain and belgium had heavy investments, british u.n . ambassador sir
patrick dean and belgium's walter loridan demanded assurances from
thant that the u.n . forces would go no farther . thant assured them
that they had halted at the lufira river . that was correct, up to a
point . with three bridges down, the indians stopped at the lufira all
right, but only long enough to rig ropes and pulleys to a swimming
float and ferry 120-mm . mortars, recoilless rifles and jeeps across
the stream . noronha had no orders to take jadotville but then again,
he had no orders not to so he kept on going . unopposed, the indians
trooped into jadotville with noronha himself heading
a column of jeeps . things were going less smoothly back at u.n .
headquarters in manhattan . convinced that thant had deceived them
about jadotville, belgian and british diplomats wanted to know what had
happened . thant intimated that his aides in the congo had exceeded
their orders . " there occurred a serious breakdown, " a spokesman
said, " in effective communication and coordination between the u.n .
headquarters and the leopoldville office . " off to leopoldville " to
determine the cause of this lapse and to ensure it will not recur "
flew u.n . under secretary ralph bunche . but once there, bunche
announced that the u.n . still wanted " freedom of movement "
throughout all of katanga, and added : " the task
