great britain this happy breeding besides the fact that there will
always be one, cliches about england are almost infinite in variety .
it rains all the time ; the cooking is miserable nothing but mutton,
tea, suety puddings and, good lord, the beer is served warm . then
there is the stereotype british male : a stoical, pipe-puffing,
baggy-tweeds type who eschews sex for a rousing game of darts in the
local pub, and when he does indulge is awkward and passionless .
british women are, for lack of practice, frigid . none of these things
has ever been very true . but nowadays, as far as sex is concerned
anyway, britons are shattering the world's illusions about their
propensities and prowess . in the bargain, they are shocking themselves
. " are virgins obsolete . on the island where the subject has long
been taboo in polite society, sex has exploded on the national
consciousness and into national headlines . " are we going sex crazy
? " asks the london daily herald . " is chastity outmoded ? " asks
a school magazine for teen-agers . " are virgins obsolete ? " is the
question posed by the sober new statesman . the answers vary, but one
thing is clear : britain is being bombarded with a barrage of
frankness about sex and flooded with a public questioning of the
long-established victorian moral standards . wrote the archbishop of
canterbury, in a recent sunday times article, " today there is in our
society an immense outbreak of preoccupation with venus . there is a
dwelling upon sex : the sex problem, the adjustments of sex,
instruction for sex, adventures of sex, stories of sex, what to do with
sex, brighter and better sex . " and the candor with which the
once forbidden subject is being explored is positively
astonishing . it is the decorous british broadcasting corp . that leads
the discussion these days . bbc programs have included a lecture on the
arguments for premarital intercourse, a discussion of homosexuality
(known on the continent as le vice anglais), a drama about an
abortionist, and another play about men reminiscing about their past
sex life ( " her breasts could fill champagne glasses " ) . on the
popular satirical show that was the week that was, the young
establishment types poke a kind of sexual fun that would make america's
fcc boss newton minow turn pale . taking off on a government report
that one baby in every eight born in london is illegitimate,
brassy singer millicent martin lamented as she rocked a cradle : don't
you weep, my little baby cause you haven't got a dad . go to sleep, my
little baby, things aren't really quite so bad . there's no reason any
longer why you ought to feel so blue . the world is full of bastards
just like you . a debris of convictions . fact is, both on and off the
air waves, the british are deeply concerned with their search for what
some call " a new morality " to fit the hushed-up facts of life . " the
popular morality is now a wasteland, " said dr . george morrison
carstairs, 46, professor of psychological medicine at edinburgh
university, in a recent bbc lecture . " it is littered with the debris
of broken convictions . a new concept is emerging, of sexual
relationships as a source of pleasure, but also as a mutual
encountering of personalities in which each explores the other and at
the same time discovers new depths in himself or herself . " in a
violently controversial report, a group of the religious society of
friends attacked the onus attached to " a great increase in adolescent
sexual intimacy " and premarital affairs . " it is fairly common in
both young men and women with high standards of conduct and integrity
to have one or two love affairs, involving intercourse, before they
find the person they will ultimately marry, " said the report . this,
concluded the quaker report, is not such a sin . " where there is
genuine tenderness, an openness to responsibility and the seed of
commitment, god is surely not shut out . " a blessing . all the hubbub
over sex has, to be sure, caused a lot of misgivings, and few churchmen
share the quakers' liberal view . but most experts agree with writer v
. s . pritchett that " allowing for its crudities, the sexual
revolution has been one of the few blessings in the life of this
century . " they attribute the new sexual tolerance and the lessening
of victorian shame to a wide variety of combined causes : the heavy
impact of both world wars on the old morality, the emancipation of
women from the hearth, a gradual increase in coeducational schooling,
and even the fact that more britons travel abroad for holidays . but
exactly where the present orgy of introspection will lead not even the
experts can predict . what seems certain, however, is that the typical
englishman of a thousand cliches is doing no more than he ever did ;
he is merely hiding it less .
