middle east so near, yet so far as jubilant delegations
dashed betleen baghdad, damascus and cairo last week, the arab world
was awash with joy . crowds swarmed in the streets chanting the slogan,
/ unity, freedom, socialism ! " in cairo and damascus, mobs shouted,
/ nasser ! nasser ! union tomorrow ! " iraq's deputy premier ali
saleh saadi cried, " the arab world will now certainly unite . this is
an old aspiration . what is new is that it has now become possible . /
double path . ; the urge to merge brought syrian and iraqi leaders
flying to cairo for 15 hours of talks with egypt's president gamal
abdel nasser, the chief beneficiary of the downfall of anti-nasser
regimes in iraq and syria . but nasser had contributed little to the
victories that were actually won in both countries by a coalition of
nasserite army officer and politicians of the baath (renaissance)
party, which has long promoted the ideal of wahadi arabiya (arab
oneness) . though both groups have the same goal of unity, each
proposes a separate path . nasser believe in centralize , authoritarian
control . the baath party favors " collective leadership " and a
democratic parliamentary government . as the talks proceeded, syria's
deputy premier nihad elkassem reportedly forced the baathists in his
delegation to accept the nasserite proposals on a threat of resigning
from office . total adherence . the conferees were reported " in close
agreement' on a planned union that indicated compromises were being
made by both sides . if accepted by individual plebiscites, the union
would create a single arab state of 39 million people with an area as
flat as texas and more than twice its size, and an economy based on the
oil of iraq, the agriculture of syria, an the industry and cotton of
egypt . the agreement calls for a single political head (almost certain
to be nasser) and a central parliament based on population, which would
give egypt a two-thirds majority . this central state would be
responsible for 1) defense and foreign policy, 2) a socialist economic
framework, and 3) unified educational and cultural programs . but
within the union, each state would have its own elected popular
authority and its own parliament . not represented in the cairo talks
was primitive yemen, whose boss, abdullah sallal, is propped up by
20,000 egyptian soldiers, but sallal cabled cairo announcing his total
adherence to whatever is decided . but at week's end, the reported "
close agreement " had apparently run into a snag . the threepower talks
unexpectedly broke up and, according to a communique, will resume " in
a few days . " while trying, at least, to unite verbally in cairo,
iraq and syria were still busy last week consolidating their
revolutions at home . iraq, which has already executed 25 local
communist leaders, condemned to death another 51 . in feeble
retaliation, the soviet union created a small riot in moscow, where a
crowd of several hundred students (including some from arab countries)
was permitted to break windows and throw ink bottles at the iraqi
embassy . the new baghdad regime also finally settled the 18-month
kurdish rebellion by reaching basic agreement with kurdish leader
mustafa barzani on terms of 1) amnesty for all rebels, 2) release of
2,000 iraqi soldiers captured in battle, and 3) autonomy for the
nation's 1,500,000 kurds . in syria, tanks and armored cars were at
last withdrawn from damascus streets although patrols of steel-helmeted
troops still remained . reportedly, about 1,000 prisoners jammed the
jails, including 80 local communists . single floor . arab nations have
often combined before on paper without preventing the individual states
from going their own anarchic way . a single military command was
agreed upon as long ago as 1951 but never implemented . the new union
may eventually prove to be little more than another exercise in
rhetoric, but last week the news of its formation sent a thrill of
excitement through pronasser elements in jordan and saudi arabia, the
two remaining arab states whose leaders are vocally anti-nasser . some
people in the arab world predict that revolt will strike jordan within
a few weeks, and saudi arabia in a matter of months . jordan's young
king hussein, determined to nip any plot in the bud, spent last week
inspecting his jordanian troops and was greeted with cheers . jordan's
imprisoned baathist leader, rifat audeh, broke jail but was quickly
recaptured . in saudi arabia, premier prince feisal completed an
unprecedented speechmaking swing around the nation and announced that
9,000 men had volunteered for his new national guard . king saud,
however, played into the hands of the monarchy's critics when he
proposed continiing his extravagant four-month convalescence (from
heart and political failures) by moving from switzerland to the french
riviera . for this week, saud has made reservations at nice's hotel
negresco for himself and 130 relatives and retainers, who will occupy
all 50 rooms on a single floor, with a special elevator reserved for
his personal use .
