france " give us some sous " as dawn rose over paris early
one morning last week, a volley of rifle shots echoed through dank,
grim ivry fort . dead before the firing squad sank ex-lieut . colonel
jean-marie bastien-thiry, 35, convicted ringleader of last summer's
abortive attempt to assassinate charles de gaulle in the paris suburb
of petitclamart as he was motoring to his country home at
colombey-les-deux-eglises. though de gaulle spared two other plotters,
he presumably ordered the execution of bastien-thiry to discourage
other terrorists from further assassination efforts on behalf of the
dread secret army organization . but de gaulle's most prominent foe,
ex-premier georges bidault, now a ranking s.a.o . chieftain, was as
publicly defiant as ever . he could afford to be, for he was now holed
up in southern germany, where, after a nervous brushoff by chancellor
konrad adenauer, he sought political asylum from the state of bavaria .
bathed in publicity and surrounded by police, he obviously was not
doing his resistance organization much concrete good in a distant
german villa . but when he called reporters in for interviews, bidault
insisted that his political activities were far from over . " i am the
leader of the national resistance council . i am the boss of it all, "
he boasted . in france, there was only official silence . fact was, the
french government was delighted that the troublemaker was in germany,
where he was under continual surveillance, and was babbling a little
too much to the press to enhance his reputation . with bidault on ice,
de gaulle turned his attention to the continuing, crippling strike of
188,000 miners in the nationalized coal fields of northern france, who
were demanding wage scales on a par with workers in private industry .
rumors circulated that s.a.o . members, disguised as cops, would attack
the strikers to provoke them to violence against the government, but
the only toll of the strike so far was economic . thousands of steel
and natural gas workers went out on a sympathy strike, and a 24-hour
rail walkout created a transportation tie-up all over france . into
paris drove a 342-car convoy of some 2,000 lorraine ironworkers
chanting : " give us some sous, pompidou . " though furious at the
continued intransigence of the strikers, de gaulle knew he might have
to give in. at a cabinet meeting in paris, he ordered studies drawn up
comparing wages in private and government-owned industry, with an eye
toward making adjustments . but he was still rankled at the monetary
support given the strikers by the roman catholic church in the northern
coal areas . asked where the funds would come from to pay for any wage
hike, he suggested we could always take up a collection in the churches
these days, with tighter
police security, de gaulle usually makes the trip between paris and
colombey by helicopter . escorted by a heavy police guard, he drives a
few miles down the highway to an isolated, predetermined spot on the
road . there, as shown with mme . de gaulle in photographs released
this week (see cuts), he leaves his car, enters the waiting helicopter,
and makes his journey .
for one thing, le grand charles was doubtless aware of the latest
report of the french institute of public opinion, which revealed that
de gaulle's rating had plummeted nine points over the preceding month,
with only 55 per cent of the french populace now " satisfied " with his
conduct of the presidency . it was de gaulle's lowest reading in 14
months .
