somalia who owns what ? it was 9 o'clock on a hot, equatorial
night, and the locals were living it up outside passoni's grocery store
on the potholed main drag of mogadishu, capital of somalia . italian
settler passoni, an enterprising sort, was raffling off boxes of
groceries . suddenly, a news bulletin from neighboring kenya blared
from a radio in a bar next door . an instant later, the guttural
twitter that is the somali tongue became an ominous muttering, and the
crowd of 500 was on the rampage . stoning cars, the somalis marched to
the british embassy, touching off three days of shouting,
window-smashing riots . matter of heritage . what set off the explosion
was announcement by british colonial secretary duncan sandys that a
slice of scrub and sand which borders on somalia would be made one of
seven provinces of kenya, which is due to get independence next year
(time, march 15) . as it happens, kenya's northeast has long been a
favorite squatting ground for nomadic somali tribesmen, who herd their
camels and goats back and forth across the horn of africa without heed
to national borders . fiercely independent, the illiterate moslem
tribesmen fight savagely among themselves for grazing land, for this is
the possession they hold most dear . a proud people, tall, lithe and
fine-featured, the somalis are hamitic in origin, descended in part
from 7th century arabs who crossed into africa from yemen . forever
vain about their heritage, they are also accustomed to having their own
way . the somalis began running into the stubborn objections of others
shortly after somalia (pop . 2,000,000) won independence in 1960 and
began building a nation out of former italian somalia and british
somaliland . emperor haile selassie coldly said no to somalia's
insistence on annexation of an ethiopian border area containing
1,000,000 somalis . france likewise refused to give up french
somaliland, where 600,000 somalis live . and though the bleak, barren
slice of territory inside kenya harbors 200,000 somalis, kenya's black
nationalist leaders, led by ex-mau mau chieftain jomo ( " burning spear
/ ) kenyatta, have always vowed that loss of their northeast corner
would mean war with their own black rendilles, who cover themselves
with feathers ; with their turkanas, who wear little except mud hats
; and with the marilles, who wear only rifles . thus, britain's sandys
was bound to make enemies and to risk violence no matter what his
decision about kenya's frontier . spearing the commissioner . no somali
saw it that way . mobs surging through mogadishu's heat (100o plus) had
to be broken up by mounted police swinging long batons ; before the
disturbance was quelled, some 500 people were arrested . in hargeisa,
the onetime capital of british somaliland, crowds stoned british homes
and cars, attacked the british consulate . presumably because of
britain's close ties to the u.s., newly arrived u.s . ambassador horace
torbert was stoned out of the town of galcaio, his land-rover narrowly
outdistancing a mob of 1,000 men, women and children . in kenya itself,
a somali tribesman speared a district commissioner, lieut . colonel
john balfour, and one mob hauled down the union jack . restoring
internal order with troops, somalia's premier abdirashid ali shermarke
called the national assembly into session, demanded that " relations
with britain be revised . " as the debate droned on, the british hoped
that passions might cool . but at week's end the outraged deputies
voted 74 to 14 to break off diplomatic relations with london, though it
seemed clear that consular ties would be retained ; such a compromise
appeared appropriate in view of the fact that the british were to
supply somalia with $3,600,000 in aid this year . with a sigh and a
shrug, britain's mogadishu embassy began packing up, and in london the
british government suggested that it " will at an appropriate time "
reconsider the whole
northeast kenya question .
