israel jew against jew in the four-month trial of adolf eichmann,
one dark chapter of the nazi holocaust was never fully brought out :
the rule of nazi-organized councils of jewish elders in european
ghettos . backed by their own high-booted jewish police, the councils
compiled death lists of jews and rounded up their own people for
deportation to nazi extermination camps . refusal to help eichmann's "
transportation " experts would have meant immediate death, but always
there was the agonizing moral dilemma : even under duress, was
cooperation not betrayal ? last week israeli prosecutor david libai
gave the state's answer in the first trial of a jewish policeman who
served the nazis . its answer was yes . in the dock of a tiny, drab tel
aviv courtroom, head buried in his hands, sat the assistant conductor
of the israel national opera, hirsch barenblat, 48, former commander of
the jewish police in bedzin, poland . for two years after he managed to
get to israel in 1958, barenblat attracted no particular attention .
then, during introductions at a concert in a kibbutz, a member of the
audience suddenly leaped up and shouted : " barenblat, i remember you
! you murdered jews ! " the concert broke up amidst angry confusion
. in 1961, after a police investigation, barenblat was arrested and
charged under the israeli law punishing nazis and their collaborators
who were members of " hostile organizations " the same law under which
eichmann was tried as a gestapo member, and which the government now
wants extended to include the jewish police . in barenblat's case, the
maximum penalty would be seven to ten years in prison on each of twelve
specific accusations of persecution . on the opening day of what looked
to be a drawn-out trial, a tel aviv carpenter tearfully recalled that
barenblat's jewish police once trooped back from a round-up in bedzin "
loudly singing, as if from a victorious engagement, " described how
they herded jewish men, women and children into trucks headed for
auschwitz . " even the streets wept, " the witness said . prosecutor
libai conceded that barenblat saved " maybe ten or 20 jews, " but added
: " this court will have to decide whether to save his own soul he was
entitled to carry out the tasks of the jewish police . " defense
attorney arieh rosenblum, supporting barenblat's plea of innocence,
said that his conduct was justifiable, and argued that he was acquitted
of collaborationist charges after the war by a polish court . " the
jewish police, " rosenblum said, " cannot be regarded as hostile to the
jewish people . their intention was not hostility . they did not seek
to exterminate jews ; they served what they deemed the best interests
of the jewish community under the worst possible circumstances . "
