south viet nam the helicopter war runs into trouble the
helicopter has revolutionized the ugly little anti-communist war in
south viet nam . using the whirlybirds for transport, government forces
no longer remain immobile in fixed outposts . they now go where the
viet cong goes . sometimes this is not very healthy, for the red
guerrillas have developed tactics to counter the copters . in the early
days, they tried to shoot them down with homemade shotguns and ancient
french rifles ; one helicopter even returned to base with an arrow
stuck in its fuselage . today, with more practice and an abundant
supply of captured u.s . weapons, the viet cong gangmen can make things
hot for the most skilled u.s . helicopter pilot . last week the viet
cong forces proved their prowess by shooting down five helicopters over
rice marshes southwest of saigon and inflicting a brutal defeat on the
government forces . like shooting ducks . the battle began as a routine
/ search and clear " operation in a red-infested area near the tiny
hamlet of apbac . the strike plan called for ten u.s . h-21
troop-carrying helicopters, escorted by five u.s . rocket-firing hu-1a
choppers, to ferry 400 government troops to the drop zone in waves of
100 men each . the first three groups landed with no ground fire from
the enemy . but as the fourth lift fluttered over the paddies, the
communists let loose with a blaze of bullets from the woods at the edge
of the rice field . " the tree line seemed to explode with machine-gun
fire, " said one helicopter pilot . " it was pure hell . " virtually
motionless, the banana-shaped helicopters were helpless targets at
point-blank range ; five of the hovering choppers were shot down, and
nine others were riddled by enemy fire . on the ground, the government
forces were pinned down in the hail of fire . " when those poor
vietnamese came out of the choppers, it was like shooting ducks for the
viet cong, " said one u.s . officer . the stunned survivors burrowed
into the slimy mud of the paddies and stayed there, refusing to
continue the assault . desperately captain kenneth good, 32, a west
pointer from ewa beach, hawaii, sought to rally the vietnamese for a
counterattack, but he was stitched through the neck and chest by a
burst from a viet cong automatic rifle . the government troops stayed
put . after eight hours of continuous bombardment, reinforcements began
to arrive . blasting away with machine guns, government armored cars
repeatedly attacked the entrenched viet cong positions at the tree line
and along a canal bordering the paddies ; each time they were driven
back . overhead, government planes pounded the viet cong with bombs and
napalm, but the communists did not break . " my god, we got a fix on
one machine-gun position and made 15 aerial runs on it, " said a u.s .
adviser . " every time we thought we had him, and every time that
damned gunner came right back up, firing . " the open wallet . as dusk
fell, the viet cong slipped into sampans and escaped down the darkened
canal with their dead and wounded . " everything we did went wrong, "
complained a u.s . adviser . a battalion of government paratroopers,
assigned the job of blocking the reds' escape route, was airdropped
into the wrong position . and when government artillery at last started
to shell the wooded viet cong positions, their rounds were zeroed in on
their own troops, killed three of their own men . worst of all, the
battered vietnamese troops showed little interest in pursuing the reds
. instead, they sloshed through the paddyfields, picking up their
casualties 68 dead and 100 wounded and poking through the downed
helicopters . on the cabin floor of one of the choppers lay the wallet
of a dead u.s . adviser open to a picture of his wife and child . in
all, three u.s . advisers captain good, sergeant william deal of mays
landing, n.j., and specialist 4 donald braman of radcliff, ky . were
killed in the ambush, and six more wounded . the dead brought to 56 the
number of u.s . troops killed so far in south viet nam . piecemealed to
death . the extent of the government defeat under conditions of its own
choosing and the heavy losses suffered by the u.s . helicopters caused
heads to snap from saigon to washington . under orders from president
kennedy, the pentagon began to investigate ways in which the choppers
can be better protected . in saigon, u.s . advisers admitted that the
day was a " miserable performance, " blamed the defeat on a " lack of
aggressiveness " by government troops . " they moved in slowly and gave
the viet cong a chance to piecemeal them to death, " said one american
officer . still, u.s . advisers are pleased with the progress made by
government troops over the past year . " casualties are inevitable when
you are fighting a war, " said one . " the viet cong are improving
their arsenal and techniques . we're doing the same and on balance
we're still way out ahead of them .
