iran water & blood on a platform jutting from a sheer,
1,500-ft . gorge in the zagros mountains, the shah of iran picked up a
ceremonial telephone and spoke an order . seconds later, tons of water
from the ab-i-diz river below crashed through sluice gates and began
turning giant dynamos . a knot of cabinet ministers, diplomats and
engineers burst into hat-waving cheers as, down in the canyon,
electricity began flowing into moslem villages that had never before
known the magic of plug-in power . thus last week iran's huge, $67.2
million " mohammed reza shah pahlevi dam, " highest in the middle
east, went into operation as another feather in the crown of the
country's 43-year-old reform-minded monarch . to help finance the dam,
the world bank loaned iran $42 million, but the rest of the cash came
from the shah's $300 million annual oil revenues . to oversee the
project, iran picked two ex-chairmen of the u.s.'s tennessee valley
authority, david e . lilienthal and gordon r . clapp, who now head a
manhattan-based consulting firm . last week's inauguration was right on
schedule, just one year and five months after the first concrete was
poured . the dam's principal purpose is to bring fertility back to
desolate khuzistan province, an area the size of michigan in southwest
iran, near the persian gulf . twenty-five centuries ago, khuzistan was
the fabled fertile granary of the ancient persian empire . but the
region has since eroded into a virtual wasteland ; the last major
reclamation attempt was a system of irrigation canals dug by king
shapur ii in 300 a.d . the new dam will water 360,000 acres, and
provide electricity even for the provinces remotest villages and five
cities, including the oil-refining center of abadan, opening the way
for industrialization . in the long run, iran hopes to build 13 more
dams to irrigate much of the semi-arid land currently being handed out
to peasants under the shah's big agrarian reform program, which was
approved 1,000to-1 in a national referendum in january . with the
nation behind him, the shah has pushed steadily ahead with his land
split-up, despite loud outcries from the big landowners . a few weeks
ago, one outraged group, the nomadic qashqai (pronounced gosh guy)
tribesmen, who herd cattle in the southern province of fars, registered
its protest by attacking iranian police posts, killing ten officers and
men . when the dissident qashqai refused to surrender and were joined
by malcontents of two other tribes, the shah grimly ordered his air
force to crush the revolt . peeling out of the sun, his u.s.made f-86
jets last week flashed down on the rebels with bombing and strafing
runs that left an estimated 150 tribesmen sprawled dead in the plains .
rising 647 ft., it will top egypt's still abuilding aswan high dam by
211 ft .
