middle east the camel driver (see
cover) at 6 : 30 one morning early this month, a phone shrilled in the
small office off the bedroom of egypt's president gamal abdel nasser .
already awake, he lifted the receiver to hear exciting news : a
military coup had just been launched against the anti-nasser government
of syria . the phone rang again . it was the minister of culture and
national guidance . how should radio cairo handle the syrian crisis ?
support the rebels, snapped nasser . then egypt's boss rapped out a
succession of telephoned commands . to the air force : alert the
bombers and fighters in case the syrian rebels call for help . to the
navy (six destroyers and ten submarines) : steam northward and await
orders . to the army : prepare to move in case the israelis might be
thinking of intervention ; place missiles on launch pads ready to fire
. this done, nasser finished dressing and went downstairs . the phone
rang again, long distance from baghdad . president abdul salam aref,
who only four weeks before had overthrown another anti-nasser regime in
iraq, solicitously asked what nasser intended doing about syria .
nasser said that he would recognize a rebel government as soon as it
was formed . aref delicately responded that of course, egypt should be
the first state to grant recognition, promised that iraq would follow
suit five minutes later . limb from limb . since the syrian coup was
both swift and successful, nasser's nerves and the egyptian army were
not put to the test . israel alerted its border defenses but made no
further move . on the surface, in fact, the syrian affair was much
milder and less bloody than most arab revolts . in the past 15 years,
the middle east has been continually shaken like a kaleidoscope,
constantly falling into new patterns . there have been two sizable wars
and fully two dozen armed uprisings and rebellions . premiers and
princes have been torn limb from limb by street mobs ; thousands of
politicians and army officers have been killed by hanging, beheading,
firing squads and assassins ; and swarms of students, workers and
tribesmen have been mowed down by machine guns and bombs . it was quite
clear last week that the latest shake of the kaleidoscope resulted in
new patterns and alignments overwhelmingly favorable to gamal abdel
nasser . the syrian revolution was the third in six months by rebels
pledged to make common cause with egypt . flights of new leaders poured
into cairo for tearstained embraces with nasser and nightlong
conferences on the future course of that misty concept called arab
unity . nasser stands at the pinnacle of prestige, if not of power, and
the shadow he casts has never been longer . today, it falls over the
entire arab world from the persian gulf to the atlantic ocean . matter
of sabotage ? for the first time in 500 years, the three key arab
states of egypt, iraq and syria have a similar political posture and
are on close and friendly terms . the new crowd in primitive yemen,
where 28,000 egyptian troops are propping up still another pronasser
rebellion, is eager to join any alliance that can be hammered out . the
monarchies of saudi arabia and jordan close friends of the west but
hated enemies of the arab nationalists face the threat of uprisings at
the hands of powerful local friends of the man in cairo . when king
saud's private comet plane, equipped with a royal throne, crashed last
week against an italian mountain, killing all 18 aboard, the saudi
arabs automatically assumed that it had been sabotaged by nasser agents
maybe it was and maybe it was not . in the
swirling middle east struggle, cairo would flex its muscles where it
could . the successful coups in yemen, syria and iraq were no surprise
to gamal abdel nasser . he knew they were coming, if not precisely when
and how . he knew the conspirators involved in each, though he claims
to have pulled no strings . cairo is thickly populated by exiles from
every corner of the arab world, ranging from syria's tough abdul hamid
serraj, who originally failed nasser in damascus, to obscure tunisians,
yemenis, saudis, jordanians and refugees from the britishbacked
sheikdoms of the persian gulf . many of them live well on egyptian
subsidies . former saudi petroleum minister abdullah tariki is in and
out of cairo frequently, helping organize arms shipments to saudi
arabian dissidents by air and across the long, empty border with kuwait
. nasser has won over saudi arabia's ambassador to west germany, who
resigned a fortnight ago in protest at his country's failure to
institute reforms . at least six other saudi ambassadors are
sympathetic to nasser's cause accented voice . all the arab world is
influenced by nasser's genius as a propagandist . rising to share
cairo's skyline with the huge dome of the mohammed ali mosque is a
forest of transmitting antennas that carry radio cairo's message to all
the world . cairo's voice bears many accents . there is the overt voice
of the arabs, and a whole concatenation of " voices " (voice of the
arab nation, free voice of iran, voice of free africa, etc.), which
bleat incitement to rebellion with no identification of their egyptian
origin . the transmitting complex is elaborate and devilishly clever .
recently, somali-language transmissions have supported the claims of
somalia to a portion of northeast kenya, while swahili broadcasts aimed
at kenya denounce the idea . a u.s . construction firm is building a
new transmitter, which will be beamed at tunisia and aimed at
destroying president habib bourguiba . egyptian tv, the liveliest in
the middle east, manages to keep three channels busy 20 hours a day,
while kinescopes subtly loaded with nasser propaganda are shipped out
to algeria, kuwait and lebanon . nasser has collected the best
entertainers in the arab world, and uses them superbly . when um
kalsoum sings we revolutionists, the bedouins in the desert are deeply
stirred . one of the most popular songs among arab kids is how we build
the high dam at aswan . every transistor radio in the middle east is a
nasser agent . when yemen revolted against the imam, nasser sent them
arms and transistors . arab communists who broadcast long, windy
speeches from bulgaria have not a chance against nasser's entertainers
. fire striker . but nasser's triumphs are not solely the result of
subversion and pop singers . his very example is an inspiration . he
has been the uncontested ruler of egypt for almost a decade, ever since
february 1954, when he put down a revolt of cavalry officers and
consolidated his regime . during that time, the old political remnants
such as the wafdists have disappeared and even been forgotten . it is
nasser whose personality stands above all others in egypt and the arab
world, and no other name strikes fire like his . he is hailed as the
man who destroyed egypt's corrupt past and gave arabs a new dignity .
his picture, with its pepsodent smile, is found in every corner of the
middle east, from iraqi bazaars to the huts of royalist yemeni
tribesmen who still cling to nasser's picture even though they are
fighting nasser's troops .
what nasser has working for him is the deep
desire of all arabs to be united in a single arab nation, and their
conviction grudging or enthusiastic that nasser represents the best
hope of achieving it . this dream of unity harks back to the golden age
of the 7th century when, spurred by the messianic moslem religion
handed down by mohammed the prophet, arab warriors burst from their
desert peninsula and conquered everything in sight . in less than 150
years, the arabs swept victoriously north to asia minor and the walls
of byzantine constantinople, south over persia and afghanistan to the
heart of india, east through central asia to the borders of china, west
over egypt and africa to spain and southern france . it was an
incredible empire larger than any carved out by alexander the great or
imperial rome . it was also an empire that fell swiftly apart . by the
16th century, the arab states, one by one, fell to the ottomans and
passed into the long sleep of turkish domination . then, in world war
i, arab nationalists rebelled against their turkish overlords and
fought beside the british armies in the middle east, confident that
they would obtain unity and freedom . moviegoers who have seen lawrence
of arabia know the gloomy result : under league of nation mandates,
most of the middle east was handed over to britain and france, and
frustrated arabs wasted themselves in futile rebellions against the
colonial powers . world war ii did little better for the arab
nationalists . individual states gained independence, but control was
securely held by feudal monarchs or coalitions of landowners and
businessmen who were often little more than colonial puppets . sir
winston churchill " invented " the state of jordan " on a sunday
afternoon in jerusalem . " even worse, in the arab view, was the
partition of palestine to provide a national homeland for the jews .
humiliation became complete in 1948, when the combined armies of the
arab countries were crushingly defeated by the israelis . moon orbit .
hence the enormous prestige nasser won in 1956, when he survived the
massed assault of britain, france and israel in the suez war . arabs
ignored the fact that the egyptians were beaten in the field and that
only intervention by the u.s . and the soviet union saved nasser from
collapse . what mattered was that nasser had engaged the imperialists
and israel in battle, and managed to survive . when egypt later proved
that it had the technical skill to operate the suez canal efficiently
on its own, arab nationalists were as proud as if nasser had personally
orbited the moon . his arab brethren also share pride in nasser's
achievements at home in the years since suez . cairo, a city as
populous as chicago, has become a bustling, busy metropolis . new
skyscrapers line the banks of the nile, throwing glittering light on
the river at night and by day reflecting in their glass walls the
stately grace of the sails of feluccas headed upriver with cargoes of
wheat and lime . the building boom is not confined to the hotels, which
were host this winter to a record half-million tourists . on the edge
of the city, entire new suburbs are in being or abuilding . at medinet
el waqf, egypt's new managers are housed in modern stucco cottages . on
the northern rim of the city, 40,000 low-cost housing units were
erected last year . but most of cairo remains the same : close,
crowded and cacophonous with hard-pressed auto horns . in imbaba, on
the west bank of the nile, camels streaked with henna still plod
unknowingly toward the slaughterhouse, and gully-gully men delight
bright-eyed, brown-faced children with magic tricks as they did their
grandfathers 50 years ago . imbaba's junk market is still unchanged,
and bent nails and half-shoelaces are traded with solemnity and
diligence . the red flowerpot of the tarboosh has all but vanished from
cairenes' heads, and nasser has even made considerable progress in his
campaign to get his city folk to switch to european clothes from the
nightshirt-like gallabiya . most astonishing is the fact that a visitor
seldom sees a barefoot man, woman or child . even urchins from the
cairo slums wear shoes and socks . today cairo walks well-dressed,
well-shod and bareheaded, with its shoulders back .
swallowed revenues . of all egyptians, the
industrial worker has fared the best under nasser . next to him comes
the fellah, the timeless peasant working the timeless land . it was the
jest of 1952 that nasser's foremost ambition was to raise the fellahin
at least to the living standard of the gamoosa, the water buffalo of
the nile . he has more than succeeded . you can see it simply in the
fellah's clothes . but also the fellah, who used to have meat only once
or twice a year, now eats it at least once a week . in pre-nasser
egypt, the most common characteristic of the fellahin was summed up in
the phrase anna mali, which roughly translates, " i couldn't care less
. " today the word heard over and over is nahdha, a term meaning to sit
up and take notice of the world around you . egypt has been awake,
taking notice and participating since the hot summer morning in july
1952, when nasser and a group of young army officers put an end to the
regime of king farouk . the resulting economic upsurge was hardly
accomplished by egypt alone . the intense development campaign
swallowed up revenues from the suez canal, and from the biggest crop,
cotton . in the process, the nation has spent its savings . egypt's
foreign-exchange reserves, which stood at a billion dollars after world
war ii, have dwindled to scarcely $10 million . the consequence is an
increasing dependence on foreign aid . the communist bloc has committed
itself to $700 million in economic aid since 1955, and russia is
footing the bill for the famed high dam at aswan, which by 1972 will
increase the arable land of egypt from 6,000,000 acres to 8,000,000
acres and supply 10 billion kw-h in electric power . since 1945, the
u.s . has supplied egypt with $628.6 million, mostly in the form of
surplus food paid for in egyptian pounds, 85 per cent of which can be
(and is) loaned back to egypt . today, egypt is dependent on the u.s .
for its food, and on russia for its arms and the aswan dam . the fact
is that nasser is not totally dependent on any one power or group of
powers . he is still determinedly nonaligned . but things are better
than the word implies . a few years ago, nasser was nonaligned toward
the east ; today, he is more accurately regarded as nonaligned toward
the west . happy nausea . but nasser's one-man rule has not brought
unmitigated bliss to egypt . the banks and insurance companies were
nationalized, and their owners paid off partly in bonds that may not be
redeemed for years to come . contractors whose earnings reach $69,000 a
year are taken over, or forced to accept joint participation by the
government . wiped out are the great landowners ; farm holdings are
now limited to 100 acres per family . this form of socialism is benign
enough . it leaves most of the nation's commerce in private hands and
does not affect the overwhelming number of small farmers, who own far
less than 100 acres . the press was nationalized in 1960, and its
editors are picked by the regime ,; they, of course, do not criticize
nasser's policies . political activity in the usual sense is banned
because, as nasser puts it, " if i had three political parties, one
would be run by the rich, one by the soviets, and one by the u.s . "
the only party permitted by law is the official arab socialist union,
which is supposed to provide democracy by its representation in every
village, factory and urban district . there, leaders are chosen to
pass local views along to provincial and national committees .
nasser's revolution
has never been particularly
totalitarian, but there was a
nasty period in late 1961, when syria
broke away from egypt . hundreds of
people, including army officers, were arrested . foreign diplomats were
shadowed by secret police . but since then, the atmosphere of fear has
largely vanished . general mohammed naguib, the 1952 revolution's first
leader, who served for two years as a front for nasser and was then
deposed, still lives quietly in a cairo villa near the nile and is
permitted to move fairly freely about the city . old nahas pasha and
other former wafdist enemies of the new regime remain in their homes,
which, in most cases, they have been allowed to keep . nasser's
government has moved impressively into the fields of education and
health . primary schools were erected and staffed at a rate of two
every three days . education is free, and egypt's universities are
crammed with 126,000 students, including 20,000 from other arab lands .
improved hygiene and free clinics have only increased the population
pressure : the new arable land to be provided by the aswan dam will be
barely enough to feed the estimated 55 million population in 20 years .
in sort, at tremendous cost, egypt will not have gone forward but
merely stood still with this challenge, nasser has begun a nationwide
birth control campaign . oral contraceptives are being sold below cost
(a month's supply for 46 #$ ), and egyptian women are said to relish
the pills because they induce the same feeling of nausea experienced in
pregnancy .
the pressure of egypt's millions, in fact, is one of the
things that makes other arab states wary of being too closely embraced
by nasser . egypt, like china, is always threatening to spill over its
borders into the relatively empty land of its neighbors .
individualistic arabs, as well, are nervously concerned about
disappearing into the straitjacket of nasser's oneman rule . laps of
generals . to these dissenters, there is another flashing beacon of
arab unity : the baath (renaissance) party, which dominates the new
governments in both iraq and syria . the street mobs and impatient
young army officers may worship nasser, but arab students and
intellectuals bow before the creator of baath, a tiny, beak-nosed,
meek-chinned syrian named michel aflak . aflak, 53, an arab christian
who counts his amber worry beads three at a time, shuns crowds and
holds no post in any government, makes an incongruous rival to the
brash, burly, good-looking nasser . no crowds have ever shrieked over
him, chanted his name or paraded his picture . he lives in a small,
cramped damascus apartment with a frayed carpet, cheap furniture, and
clothes drying on a balcony washline . his two infant children toddle
about and, last week, clambered on the laps of generals and cabinet
ministers who crowded aflak's parlor . the son of a nationalist-minded
shopkeeper, aflak passionately embraced the ideal of arab unity as a
damascus schoolboy . his education at the sorbonne in paris, where he
graduated with honors in history, was financed by a successful uncle
who had emigrated to brazil . after a brief teaching career at a
damascus lycee, aflak resigned in 1942 to devote his life to politics
and to his personal creation, the baath party . what aflak created was
a mystic and lyrical hymn to wahadi arabiya (arab oneness), and he
overflows with such sentiments as " nationalism is love before
everything else, " and " a new page is open, the page of those who walk
with naked souls as if they were in their own bedroom . " he defines
revolution as " that powerful psychic current, that mandatory struggle,
without which the reawakening of a nation cannot be understood . " the
baath slogan, " unity, freedom, socialism, " was blandly appropriated
by nasser for his own use, but nasser has shown no eagerness to take
over other baath tenets, such as free elections, free press, and
freedom of speech and assembly . from syria, baathism moved swiftly to
iraq and jordan, more slowly to kuwait and saudi arabia . although the
party is antibourgeois, most of its adherents come from middle-class
intellectuals and small shopkeepers . baath made conservative
governments nervous with its socialism (which is actually a blend of
mild marxism and the new deal), and was attacked by the communists as a
deviating exponent of weak liberalism . in syria, during the course of
14 years and nine different coups, the baath party bobbed up and down .
not until 1958, when syria's communists were plotting an armed
takeover, were the baathists able to stampede syrian conservatives into
accepting unity with egypt as the lesser evil . slipped border . unity
was obtained, but at a high price . once in control, nasser insisted on
the abolition of all parties, baath included, and fixed on syria the
same tight controls and security-police system as in egypt . designated
as the northern region of the united arab republic, syria was flooded
by officious egyptian brass and cramped by nasser's authoritarian
economic schemes . syrian officers who protested found themselves
transferred to duty deep in egypt ; civilians quickly landed in jail .
at last, even michel aflak rebelled and ordered the baath cabinet
ministers to resign in a body, setting the stage for syria's angry
secession from the u.a.r .
in iraq the baath party faced crisis from the
moment dictator karim kassem established his bloody dictatorship in
1958 . the baathists participated in an armed revolt in the oil center
of mosul, which kassem savagely suppressed with the help of iraq's
communist militia . a baathist group tried to kill kassem, but failed
and was butchered . finally, last month, baathist politicians and
pro-nasser military men organized and executed the coup that resulted
in
the death of kassem and the slaughter of hundreds of his communist
allies . four weeks later with far less blood baathists and pro-nasser
officers in damascus brushed aside the conservative government of syria
. the way at last was open for the unity that everyone had been talking
about . complete lesson . the difficulty, of course, is that everyone
wants unity on his own terms . even jordan's king hussein, who is
anathema to nasser and the baathists, says he hopes for eventual
reconciliation with his enemies and admission of jordan into the arab
union . if necessary, hussein told newsmen, he would abdicate to
achieve arab unity . but he quickly added, " provided it's unity on a
proper basis . " michel aflak replies : " jordan and saudi arabia are
welcome to join the arab union, but not with their present regimes and
rulers . " in cairo president nasser has given every indication that he
intends to avoid the mistakes made during the hurried and ill-fated
union with syria . " the main reason for the lack of success, " nasser
told time last week, " was that we accepted complete union and
amalgamation, instead of federation and self-government in both states
. " to begin discussion of a better system, iraqi and syrian
delegations flew into cairo fortnight ago for preliminary talks with
nasser . last week an even more high-powered group of syrians arrived,
headed by michel aflak and premier salah el-bitar, with the intention
of laying down a solid foundation for the proposed unity structure .
this week another set of delegates from syria and iraq will return to
cairo, each bringing a draft project for a new union . noise in aleppo
. it seems unlikely that any kind of federation with centralized
authority will emerge . what is possible is a loose alliance, with
harmonized defense and foreign policies . there might also be a degree
of economic cooperation among the three nations, possibly including
even yemen, which is so backward that it has been described as "
rushing into the 13th century . " such a system of sovereign states
would represent a tacit admission that arabs are not all alike and that
their interests do not always coincide . the fact that the talks
between syrians, iraqis and egyptians have not yet produced anything
concrete is less important than the fact that they are, at least,
talking to one another and not screaming imprecations as they have done
so often in the past . but already some arabs were becoming impatient .
there were pro-nasser demonstrations in the syrian port of aleppo . in
damascus a tough young nasserite who had moved directly from a prison
cell to an ornate government office dismissed the baathists as
ideologists, not political leaders . " we are going to run syria with
nasser the way we want, " he said . " we are going to unite with egypt
the way nasser wants . " blasting paths ? the fact that the middle
east is so consistently combustible and has so low an ignition point
makes its affairs of deep importance to other powers . in the old city
of jerusalem last week, arabs were jarred by recurrent dull explosions
in the border areas, and there was speculation that israeli demolition
squads were blowing up old mines in noman's land to clear lanes for an
advance into jordan should king hussein be overthrown by nasserites .
israel is not impressed by suggestions that egypt's ruler has
given up his domineering ways . one official in tel aviv warned : "
nasser finds it difficult to resist temptation . success turns his
head, and being basically a military man, he thinks in terms of
external expansion . " the israeli government sees a hint of nasser's
dreams of grandeur in his yemen adventure, which has already tied up
one-third of his army israel's stated policy is that any change in the
internal situation of her arab neighbors affecting the security of her
borders would free israel of her undertaking to maintain the status quo
. many arabs fear that israel would move troops straight to the west
bank of the jordan river . if hussein's regime collapses . fat or thin
. britain's
present relations with egypt are correct but cool . while recognizing
nasser's pre-eminence in the arab world and his great abilities, the
british remain wary of the man and his policies . understandably,
britain is worried about the future of its few remaining middle east
colonies and its important oil interests . " nasser's own stand on oil
is ambiguous, " complains one diplomat . " of course, he would like to
control oil-rich kuwait, but so would everyone else . " british and u.s
. oil executives, though admitting to some uneasiness about nasser's
intentions, see no immediate threat to the middle east's daily flow of
6,500,000 bbl . " we have learned to live with political instability, "
says one oilman stoically . their fear is not that the west will lose
access to the middle east's proven oil reserves of 194 billion bbl.,
but that any new arab grouping might start a campaign to reduce the
producer's profits . " arab unity may be good or bad for the oil
industry, " explained one official . " it depends on the goals of unity
and these are difficult to discern in the present situation . " drawn
line . sharply hostile after nasser's suez nationalization, and nervous
at his flirtation with the communists, u.s . policy more recently has
turned in nasser's favor . recalling the days not so long ago when
cairo radio was spouting ugly lies about the u.s., washington is not
inclined to be nasser's sponsor . but the u.s . can cooperate with the
man whose name is on every arab lip . officially, the u.s . aims at
assisting any government, no matter what its form, that appears to be
sincerely and effectively working for internal development and the good
of its people . with indifference to social systems, the u.s . has
aided egypt on the left and iran on the right, recognized the
monarchies of jordan and saudi arabia as well as pro-nasser yemen . but
there is a line drawn by the u.s . " if the cold war in the arab world
threatens the large american interests in, say, saudi arabia, we'll
have to take a stand, " says a u.s . official . similarly, the u.s .
considers itself nonaligned in the struggle between israel and the arab
world . washington's attitude toward arab union is still tied to a
pronouncement made by secretary of state john foster dulles during the
eisenhower administration . dulles said then, and it was repeated last
week in washington, that the u.s . looks with favor on any movement
toward arab union that is not imposed from outside the arab world .
great coups . nasser today takes an indulgent view of the u.s . his
earlier resentments, he says, resulted from american attempts to force
egypt into joining such " imperialist " groupings as the mediterranean
defense organization and the baghdad pact . nasser applauds the present
administration in washington because " kennedy tried from the first to
understand us and to be realistic when facing the arab world . under
john foster dulles, the u.s . withdrew its aid for the aswan dam, we
faced blockade and even the blocking of our own money in u.s . banks .
/ however, nasser concedes, " it should not be forgotten that the u.s .
stood by us in the united nations during the suez crisis, and that left
a good impression . " president nasser and president kennedy have
become close correspondents . " we are very frank with each other, "
says nasser . " we don't exchange diplomatic words but express honest
and frank opinions . i believe we have built up a confidence in each
other . " the confidence extends to u.s . ambassador john badeau, who
speaks fluent arabic and has unlimited access to nasser, while his
british counterpart sees nasser only twice a year at formal meetings .
the communists are so convinced that the u.s . controls events in the
middle east that the polish ambassador in cairo stopped a u.s .
diplomat at the entrance to a luncheon party and said bitterly : " i
must congratulate you on your tremendous achievements in iraq and syria
. you have made two great coups . " jiggled leg . at week's end in
cairo, the conferences on arab unity droned on to the accompaniment of
cigarette smoke and endless small cups of coffee . nasser sat in on the
negotiations, serenely confident that what finally emerged would be
what he wanted . at 45, nasser's hair has greyed at the temples, and he
has given up tennis for the less demanding sport of swimming . he
appears as physically fit as ever and retains his old nervous habits of
jiggling his leg while sitting, and of smoking five packs of l . & m.s
a day ; like most egyptians, he cannot stand the local brands . he
still works twelve and 18 hours at a clip and is still the only man in
the government who can be reached at any hour . a close aide says : "
i've never heard of anyone getting chewed out for calling nasser in the
middle of the night . i do know of many who have been given unshirted
hell for not calling him when something happened . he won't like you to
say this, but it is still strictly a one-man show . he has lots of good
technical help, but he trusts no one else with politics . " even more
than russians, arabs express their folk wisdom in proverbs, ranging
from the cautionary (see cover) to the racially skeptical ( " better
the tyranny of the turks than the justice of the arabs " ) . there are
proverbs aplenty to fit the dream of unity . to the ambitious nasser,
other arab leaders might point out the one that says, " the camel
driver has his plans, and the camel has his . " but proverbs are
eclipsed by power, and last week nothing was more certain than that
whatever unity scheme emerges in the middle east, must, first of all,
be satisfactory to gamal abdel nasser . for of all the revolutions
involved, only his in egypt has survived and prospered for a full ten
years .
