great britain what ever happened to christine keeler
? she was just another girl from middlesex who called herself a model
a euphemism as vague as " starlet " and with just as many implications
. but leggy, redheaded christine keeler, 21, managed to move in
mayfair's smartest circles and numbered among her wide range of
gentlemen acquaintances top names in london's political, social,
diplomatic and show business worlds . last week the social life of
christine keeler, onetime waitress and fulltime playgirl, was all over
the front pages of the british press . christine's sponsor was a social
gadabout named stephen ward, 43, an artist and osteopath who lives in a
thamesside summer house on viscount astor's famed estate at cliveden .
/ i know a lot of very important people and am often received in some
of the most famous homes in the country, " says ward . " sir winston
churchill and many leading politicians have been among my patients ;
prince philip, the duke and duchess of kent and lord snowdon have been
among my sitters . " ward also had a genuine interest in young girls of
humble origin . " i like pretty girls, " he says . " i am sensitive to
the needs and the stresses of modern living . " to the great and near
great, ward introduced " attractive young girls like christine keeler,
who come from the provinces or the remote suburbs " and for whom "
london is a battlefield . " chain of events . ward arranged an
unsuccessful screen test for christine with douglas fairbanks jr.,
introduced her to a naval attache at the russian embassy, and to a "
senior naval officer of the american fleet who sorted out her problems
. " but christine, said ward, also had " occasional foolhardy
adventures in the completely different world of colored men . " one day
last december, johnnie edgecombe, christine's west indian lover, showed
up outside ward's west end flat, where christine was visiting, and
fired several shots at the door . police carted johnnie away and tagged
christine to be a principal witness at his trial . then came a peculiar
chain of events . christine keeler failed to show up for johnnie's
trial, and the leading newspapers hinted that christine feared
cross-examination about her private life and had dropped out of sight
to protect her prominent friends . on top of that came news that ward's
cliveden house, the scene of many a fashionable party and fortuitous
introduction, had been ransacked ; ward's letters were stolen, and
scattered all over the floor were a nude photograph of christine and a
slew of pornographic pictures, which ward claimed were not his . in
whitehall and in the house of commons smoking rooms, rumors began
circulating that one of christine's many acquaintances was a government
minister .
cheek to cheek . at a late-night commons
session last week, a labor m.p . unexpectedly
asked the government " to deny
the truth of these rumors :. involving
a member of the government's front
bench . " another m.p . tried to make light
of the issue . " what do these rumors
amount to ? " he said . " they amount to
the fact that a minister has an acquaintance
with a very pretty girl . i should have
thought that that was a matter for congratulation
rather than enquiry . /
but left-wing laborite barbara castle
insisted on getting back to the question
of " miss christine keeler, missing call
girl, vanished witness . " what, she asked,
" if there is something else of much greater
importance ? what if there is a question
of the perversion of justice at stake ? /
for the government's answer next
morning, the commons was packed . on
the front bench with prime minister harold
macmillan sat urbane tory secretary
of state for war john profumo, 48, whose
beautiful actress wife valerie (great
expectations) hobson sat quietly in the
speaker's gallery overhead . profumo rose
and calmly said, " i understand that my
name has been connected with the rumors
about the disappearance of miss keeler . /
indeed, profumo said, he and his wife
had met christine at cliveden, and he had
subsequently seen her " on about six occasions
at dr. ward's flat " in london . " i
last saw miss keeler in december 1961,
and i have not seen her since . any suggestion
that i was in any way connected
with or responsible for her absence from
the trial is wholly  and completely untrue .
there has been no impropriety between
myself and miss keeler . i shall not hesitate
to issue writs for libel and slander if
scandalous statements are made outside
this house . /
after the two-minute speech, profumo
and his wife left the commons for the
races at sandown park, where they were
the guests in the royal box of the queen
mother . that night the profumos danced
cheek to cheek at a tory party ball .
