sikkim where there's hope guests in top hats and cutaways
mingled with others in fur-flapped caps and knee-length yakskin boots
last week outside the tiny buddhist chapel in sikkim's dollhouse
himalayan capital of gangtok . wedding parcels from tiffany's were
piled side by side with bundled gifts of ranksmelling tiger and leopard
skins . over 28,146-ft . mount kanchenjunga, the world's third highest
mountain and sikkim's " protecting deity, " hung a blue haze . it was
an " auspicious sign, " said gangtok astrologers, for the wedding of a
quiet, blue-eyed new york girl, hope cooke, 22, and gyalsay rimpoche
maharajkumar palden thondup namgyal, 39, crown prince of the indian
protectorate of sikkim, a tiny territory the size of delaware, which
has 3,000 varieties of rhododendrons, and where, according to local
legend, the devils always travel uphil . the american touch . the ward
of former u.s . ambassador to iran selden chapin and a graduate in
oriental studies from sarah lawrence, hope met her widowed future
husband four years ago while she was vacationing at the indian resort
of darjeeling . but when the couple announced plans to marry last year,
sikkimese soothsayers forced the postponement of the wedding because of
their forecast that 1962 was " a black year " for the marriage . thus
hope had to wait until last week to become the first american girl to
wed royalty since the daughter of a former philadelphia bricklayer
married monaco's prince rainier in 1956 . hope's wedding dress was a
wraparound, frost-white brocade silk mokey, held in at the waist by a
gold belt, from which hung a small dagger . to ward off evil spirits,
hope pressed her hand into a piece of dough . a pair of holy men
conducted her to the chapel, where she was greeted by a fanfare of
trumpeting, 10ft.-long himalayan horns, braying conch shells, and
booming bass drums . outside the chapel door was the only distinctively
american touch in the $60,000 buddhist rite a mat on which was written
in english, " good luck . " billions of deities . during the 50minute
buddhist ceremony, hope sat on a throne slightly lower than that of the
crown prince, who in turn was seated lower than his father, the
69-year-old maharajah of sikkim . after drinking tea laced with yak
butter, a red-robed buddhist lama in a flame-shaped hat invoked the
blessings of the snow lions and billions of other sikkimese deities .
no wedding vows were spoken ; the couple merely exchanged 12-ft.-long
white silk scarves, which were hung around each other's neck to seal
their marriage contract . the end of the ceremony set off a fourday
celebration in gangtok, whose normal population of 12,000 swelled to
15,000 for the event . mountain tribesmen in blue pajamalike clothes
danced in the streets . mixing happily with the celebrators, hope
settled into her new role with aplomb . when a pigtailed sikkimese girl
asked for her autograph, the new crown princess signed without a
moment's hesitation : " hope namgyal .
hope is the daughter of mr . and mrs . john j . cooke
. when her parents were divorced, custody of hope was given to her
mother . when her mother died, she became the ward of her maternal
grandparents, mr . and mrs . winchester noyes . when they died, she
became the ward of her uncle, ambassador chapin .
