bali the gods speak when java was lost to the mohammedans 485
years ago, so the legend goes, the disgusted hindu gods hunted around
for a new home . they chose the island of bali, and since their exalted
rank demanded a high dwelling place, they created a chin of mountainse
most sacred eastern end of the island, the gods erected the highest of
bali's mountains, the 10,308foot volcano of gunung agung, regarded by
the balinese as " the navel of the world . " halfway up the slope of
agung, the pious balinese built the huge mother temple of besakih, and
every hundred years they have held a solemn rite there to rid the
island of ghosts . last week, in the midst of the once-a-century
festival, agung erupted with catastrophic fury . agung gave fair
warning . only last month, after more than 100 years of inactivity, it
burst forth with a shower of smoke and brimstone that killed 17 persons
. there was worried talk on bali that the gods were angry because the
people had not asked permission to hold their festival . but the
priests and their disciples stayed on to pray . at 7 o'clock one
morning, agung erupted again . the villages of sebudi, sorgah, and
sebih were engulfed by a lethal black cloud of searing, 230o ash that
roasted hundreds where they knelt . rivers of grey-black lava boiled
over agun's southern lip and flowed in fiery rivulets down stream beds,
raising clouds of steam ; heavy rains, possibly caused by the heat of
the volcano, mixed with the sulphurous ash to form an acid that killed
plant life for five miles around . for five days agung belched death .
at week's end hhe death toll stood at close to 1,200, and another
200,000 were left homeless . as survivors streamed into towns at the
base of the mountain, many suffering third-degree burns from a trek
over beds of smoldering ashes, indonesia's president sukarno declared
all bali a disaster area . there was little hope that agung's fury was
over . experts in djakarta predicted even more violent eruptions to
come and ordered all residents to leave the area for at least two
months .
