europe the snow blitz a howling gale from the arctic icebox
collided over western europe with warm, moist winds from the
mediterranean . the result : the most savage winter storms of the
century . an austrian express train bound from vienna to paris got so
thoroughly lost in the blizzard that it ended up in munich . a yugoslav
train reached its destination minus its last five cars ; they had
blown off en route . even such southern cities as marseille and
barcelona were blanketed with snow . temperatures fell so low in
switzerland that the hardy monks and trusty dogs of st . bernard
retreated to the valley from their alpine monastery . ten french
villages along the english channel were isolated for days, and
inhabitants ran out of bread, meat and coal . roads in northern france
became literally paths of ice, and a man could have skated 100 miles
from boulogne to beauvais . as rivers and canals froze in the
netherlands, droves of ice skaters turned out, and 50 drowned in a
single day . in some places along europe's baltic coast, the sea itself
was turning to ice . britain was hit even more savagely than the
continent . some 95,000 miles of highways were completely out of
service . eight-foot drifts blocked the main road from london to
portsmouth, and near weymouth, belated rescuers dug down to a
snow-buried car, found two dead and three nearly smothered travelers .
helicopters in dorset saved 71 trapped bus passengers, including a
month-old baby sheltered in a cardboard box . asian gurkha troops were
called out from army camps to rescue stranded old-age pensioners in
wiltshire . one result of the weather was london's quietest new year's
eve in recent memory . only a few hardy souls gathered in piccadilly
circus for the traditional singing of auld lang syne . there were 162
arrests, mostly for throwing snowballs at policemen . a daily herald
columnist discovered another social effect of the snow blitz . in mock
horror, he reported that " five total strangers talked to me in the
blizzard on the station platform .
