great britain the angry ones hey nonny no ! trilled the tory
daily mail one morning last week . after the bitterest winter in 50
years, daffodils were blooming in london's parks, and government
officials reported with relief that the unemployment rate had dropped,
from 3.9 per cent to 3.1 per cent , for the first time in more than
six months . their jubilation was short-lived . in a rite of spring
such as britain has not witnessed since the depression, more than 5,000
jobless workers converged on london to protest their plight, touching
off an ugly, rock-throwing battle at the very door of parliament .
raising the flag . it all began peacefully enough with a banner-waving
parade toward westminster, where workers' leaders were determined to
carry personal protests to their m.p.s . awkwardly at first, many
fingering the cloth caps that are the traditional badge of the british
workingman, they stood talking until the house of commons' big central
lobby was jammed, while a surging mob of workers still outside jostled
impatiently to get through st . stephen's doorway . when 500 hastily
summoned foot and mounted police tried to force them back, the protest
demonstration exploded into a savage, three-hour melee provoked partly
by communists in the crowd . crying " fascists " and " gestapo, " the
workers dropped lighted cigarettes into police horses' mouths, tried to
drag the cops from their mounts, hurled horse manure at them . some
young workers climbed onto the stone figures around the entrance, and
one communist agitator even hauled up a red flag . when a police cordon
forced them away from the buildings after six charges, hundreds of
demonstrators staged a sitdown strike in the road . the crowd included
kilted scotsmen and old-age pensioners, apprentices, mill girls and
grizzled steelworkers . most came from the northern shipbuilding and
steelmaking cities of england, scotland and northern ireland, where the
misery of the 1930s is not forgotten . last week, by contrast with the
hunger marches of that era, most arrived by train or bus ; some even
came by plane . said a scottish miner : " we are not hungry men asking
for food . we are angry men asking for self-respect . " getting into
politics . they pointed out that though warm weather has boosted
employment in homebuilding and heavy construction, the actual total of
unemployed (702,000) in britain was still 250,000 higher than in the
previous march, and was actually rising in the worst-hit northern areas
. another rally next day by some 5,000 teachers demanding a wage raise
showed that disenchantment with harold macmillan's conservative
government is even more widespread . it was far too early to predict
the impact of all this on the coming elections, which will probably
take place next year . but macmillan hardly welcomed the demonstrations
on top of all the other recent bad news : three by-election reverses
in a fortnight, and a new gallup poll report on voter preference
showing that the labor party holds a record 16.5 per cent lead over the
tories .
