the allies temptation of trade pipe the big kind that russia
desperately needs to complete its vast gas and oil network stretching
from the pacific to the elbe was the second biggest topic in european
capitals last week . for months, nato has been urging a total embargo
on large-diameter pipe . sputtered a nato official in paris : " sell
them rifles . even sell them atomic bombs . but don't sell them pipe .
/ provoking the outcry was a rumble that started in bonn fortnight ago
when rebellious members of the bundestag rounded up enough votes to
reverse the governmen't cancellation of a juicy $20 million soviet pipe
order . chancellor konrad adenauer rushed back home from a lake como
vacation on the eve of the balloting, managed to avoid humiliating
defeat only by ordering his christian democrats to stay off the floor,
thus causing the lack of a quorum . der alte's last-ditch maneuver
proved his solid support of the u.s., which, unlike most of its allies,
attaches great strategic significance to moscow's pipeline network .
but it got adenauer into trouble at home . the pro-nato socialists
called the bundestag boycott dirty pool ; the industrialists
complained more bitterly than ever . there the issue could have
simmered indefinitely ; but last week the british calmly announced
that, since they had never supported nato's pipe embargo in the first
place, the government had no objection if a british firm accepted a
soviet deal for pipe that bonn had just canceled . that only one
british company was technically equipped to turn out small amounts of
large-diameter pipe and had not even received a bid from moscow was of
small comfort to u.s . and west german officials . nor were they
reassured by the fact that italy, a major supplier of soviet pipe
before the nato ban, did not immediately grab off part of the lucrative
trade ; italian manufacturers simply were backed up at the moment with
their own domestic orders . what really had washington and bonn
concerned was london's next move . britain, excluded for now from the
common market and plagued by serious unemployment, was eager for export
markets anywhere ; if one inch of large-diameter oil pipe was
delivered to russia, the nato boycott would be broken . west germany
and italy could no longer be restrained . neither could france, which
has a massive (500,000 tons), and mostly unused, annual capacity for
pipe production, but which supports the u.s . completely on the allies'
debate over the strategic value of moscow's big inch .
