austria two on the seesaw ever since world war ii even through ten
years of soviet occupation the austrian government has been run jointly
by the conservative people's party and the socialist party, like two
polite, equally weighted cousins on an inert seesaw . so scrupulously
balanced is the coalition and the proporz system of dividing up the
jobs that, according to viennese table talk, if there is one people's
party putzfrau (charwoman) in a government building, there must be a
socialist putzfrau too . after last november's elections, balance
became stalemate ; the two big parties have been haggling over a
cabinet ever since . a group of vociferous people's party reformers
argued for less of the traditional cooperation with the socialists, but
the meager victory of the people's party 81 seats to 76 for the
socialists was hardly a mandate for sweeping change . still,
conservative chancellor alfons gorbach shared the reformers' feeling
that the extra strength entitled his party to at least one more
ministry . the one in mind : the foreign ministry, where socialist
bruno kreisky was the prime target of the people's party reformers .
the conservatives argued that a socialist could not possibly put his
heart into the vital negotiations for austrian associate membership in
the common market, which, after all, was a triumph of capitalism . for
more than four months, the socialists and people's party negotiators
met almost daily in the ornate ballhaus palace to argue about the
cabinet, and all the while austria hummed along happily under a
provisional government that was precisely in the middle of the road .
last week the bickering ended at last with the people's party on the
short end . the able, personable kreisky stayed on as foreign minister,
and this victory for the socialists was countered only by the addition
of a few people's party state secretaries to the trade and justice
ministries . another socialist, former trade union boss franz olah,
took over the interior ministry, where he is in control of the
country's police power . olah is an able man, but for many austrians
his appointment means trouble . on his second day in office, he told a
press conference that he felt it perfectly proper for his cops to
strike if they wanted to .
