multi-bafflement the u.s .
today is engaged in not one, but two nuclear arms races . its first and
overriding concern, of course, is to deter soviet aggression and to be
capable of massive retaliation if the russians should attack the west .
washington's second aim, however, is less strategic than political ;
it could be called the theory of the massive placebo, since its primary
purpose is not to deter the foes of the u.s . but to mollify its
friends and discourage the proliferation of nuclear arms . by last
week, u.s . placebo planners had succeeded only in frustrating and
perplexing the very allies they hoped to please . uneasily aware that
the increasingly prosperous and powerful nations of western europe
would not forever accept total u.s . control of nuclear weapons, the
u.s . offered more than two years ago to give them a voice in their
disposition and use but left it to europe to devise a formula . it was
not until the kennedy administration canceled the bug-ridden skybolt
missile project last december that the u.s . was forced to take the
initiative . in place of skybolt, the administration reluctantly
offered at nassau to supply polaris missiles for an independent british
submarine force . change of mind . at the same time, the u.s . insisted
that the british subs must be " multinational, " that is, they were to
be part of a nato deterrent in which other allies might in time pool
their own strike forces, if and when they acquired nuclear weapons . to
placate its other european allies, the kennedy administration also
proposed a " multilateral " force of polaris submarines, which would be
multimanned and multifinanced by the u.s . and its partners, each of
whom would have a veto over the use of the missiles . then, just as the
europeans began to get interested in this scheme, the u.s . abruptly
changed its mind and announced that the multilateral force (mlf) should
consist of polaris-armed surface vessels instead though it would be
little strategic value, a 25-ship surface force would cost only $500
million yearly, far less than a submarine fleet . to most europeans,
the strongest argument for the mlf was that it would give west germany
a voice in nuclear strategy and possibly discourage it from developing
nuclear weapons of its own, with or without help from france frankly
interested . to peddle the placebo, the administration plucked old
state department hand livingston merchant from retirement . to his
surprise, mlf met with a surprisingly warm reception . though some
allied statesmen hemmed that its cost would prevent them from meeting
u.s . requests to strengthen conventional forces, west germany, italy
and belgium were frankly interested . last month merchant actually
succeeded in extracting a commitment from west germany to pay 40 per
cent of the entire cost of the project . however, last week, word
reached nato headquarters in paris that washington had suddenly lost
its enthusiasm for the multilateral force . its change of mind not only
left unsolved the political problems that mlf was devised to solve, but
even seemed likely to aggravate them, since the u.s . was now
reportedly ready to back the idea of independent multinational forces
instead, thus encouraging its allies to build their own bombs . even if
every nato ally could afford its own nuclear force and a scientific
breakthrough may yet make that feasible europe would have only a minute
proportion of the total u.s . nuclear armory . but who can predict how
it will turn out ? in the brave new world of build-your-own-bang, it
could even happen that european hydrogen bombs might not fall on the
soviet union at all, but on the u.s .
