switzerland sickness on the slopes the little alpine ski
resort of zermatt rakes in a lucrative $10 million from visitors each
year, but the authorities there know that customers are notoriously
fickle ,rnight a touch of bad weather, bad service in the hotels or an
ugly scandal can send hundreds of tourists off in a huff to st . moritz
or davos . hence the reluctance of zermatt's townsmen to talk about the
curious wave of illness that began popping up three months ago . they
stolidly ignored word from a zurich physician that a patient just back
from skiing in zermatt was down with typhoid fever . they also shrugged
off a report that an italian immigrant working near zermatt had fallen
ill with the same disease . even then, zermatt officials publicly
pooh-poohed rumors of an epidemic . the zermatt tourist office
pronounced zermatt's water " 99.93 per cent pure, " while local
citizens denounced the " foreign sensationalist press " for reporting
the gossip . as thousands more unwary tourists poured in, packing
zermatt's 56 hotels to the rafters, cash registers jingled and typhoid
spread unchecked . last week zermatt was regretting its laxity .
already dead were three zermatt citizens and a british tourist . at
least 350 confirmed or suspected cases of typhoid had been traced to
recent zermatt visitors in switzerland and eight foreign countries .
little zermatt was suddenly in the headlines all over the world .
virtually all the 10,000 tourists had staged a hurried exodus, leaving
zermatt a ghost town occupied by 120 green-uniformed swiss army medical
corpsmen . by sealed train and helicopter, the army men evacuated local
victims, and health inspectors poking through zermatt's water system
discovered the probable cause of it all a hole in a water pipe into
which sewage was seeping . at week's end, denounced at home by the
valais medical association for a conspiracy of silence, and disgraced
abroad, the zermatt authorities at last closed down all the hotels and
restaurants . to the villagers left stranded in dismal unemployment, it
seemed a pity, for nearly a foot of new powder snow fell on the slopes
that night . " absolutely wonderful skiing conditions, " mourned
gottlieb perren, head of zermatt's famed ski school .
