middle east trouble for 333 outside cairo sprawls a rambling
complex of buildings known as military factory 333 . there president
gamal abdel nasser is trying to develop the powerful weapons system he
needs to ensure military supremacy in the middle east . from 333's
workrooms last year came the first batch of missiles, a few 230-mile
el-zafir (victory) types, and the 370-mile elkahir (conqueror) .
although their reliability is none too certain, the military leaders of
nearby israel have nervously noted nasser's claims that egypt's birds
will have the range to blast important targets " just south of beirut "
that is, in israel itself . mysterious misfortunes . hence israel's
extraordinary interest in the key men who staff factory 333 . they are
not egyptians at all, but an estimated 200 german scientists and
technicians, many of whom first learned their skills making v-2s for
adolf hitler . ever since the germans helped nasser test-fire his first
successful rockets last july, israeli intelligence chiefs have been
conducting a deadly underground war to force or frighten the german
scientists away from the project . last month two israeli agents were
arrested in switzerland after they allegedly put pressure on the son
and daughter of dr . paul-jens goercke, a west german
electronic-guidance expert employed at military factory 333 . as swiss
police told it, the agents persuaded heidi goercke, 25, and her brother
hans, 21, to cross the frontier from freiburg, germany, and warned them
that they must talk their father into coming home from egypt or else he
would face " serious " trouble . eavesdropping on the conversation,
forewarned swiss detectives tossed the israeli operatives into jail,
charged them with coercion and operating illegally on behalf of a
foreign state . the incident recalled a whole chain of mysterious
misfortunes that have befallen germans linked to egypt . last summer
the private plane of an egyptian supplying arms and technicians blew up
over northern germany, killing his wife ; in november two airmail
parcels addressed to german rocket engineer wolfgang pilz blew up when
opened in his office in egypt, killing five egyptians and disfiguring
pilz's german secretary . then, on a road near the west german town of
lorrach, a would-be assassin fired a pistol shot a a professor engaged
in electronics research for egypt ; the bullet missed and the would-be
assassin escaped in a car . biggest unsolved riddle is the whereabouts
of dr . heinz krug, 49, boss of a munich firm that dealt in military
hardware for egypt . last november, krug vanished from his office in
the company of a polite stranger and has not been seen since .
backtrack in bonn . to charges that israel is behind the incidents,
israeli authorities insist that their agents employ only peaceful
persuasion . israel's foreign minister golda meir rose in the knesset
(parliament) fortnight ago to brand germans in egypt an " evil crew . "
she demanded that west germany order them to halt their work . bonn
retorted that the germans in egypt were private citizens with no
official connections whatsoever ; the government could hardly dictate
their professions . but anxious to stay on good terms with the
israelis, chancellor konrad adenauer last week agreed to reconsider the
matter, ordered formation of a committee to decide whether some kind of
controls such as removal of passports should be imposed on german
citizens whose work abroad endangered the nation's good relations with
another country .
