onto the bandwagon gamal abdel nasser still had the most popular
commodity in the middle east the lure of arab unity . a 14-man algerian
delegation, headed by defense minister houari boumedienne showed up in
cairo to pay its respects . " regarding arab unity, " said boumedienne,
/ our objective should be the creation of solid, strong and healthy
bases . the arab people are not ready to accept another setback,
another letdown . for that reason, all steps toward arab unity must be
absolutely unshakeable . " nasser agreed completely . " we refuse, if
anybody asks us, " he said, " to form a nominal union for outward
appearances . " later, he fervently told a syrian delegation headed by
baath party leaders michel aflak and salah el-bitar : " we believe the
tide of revolutionary union in this generation is a historic
opportunity which will not repeat itself . " he also suggested that the
baathists broaden their new syrian government to bring in popular that
is, nasserite elements . " man of crises . " he got fast results .
within three days, pro-nasser lieut . general louai attassi was named
president of the syrian council of the revolutionary command, and the
council itself was enlarged to admit a nasserite majority . attassi
predicted that union with egypt and iraq would be achieved " shortly, "
claiming, " this tripartite federation will spread and spread until the
entire arab world from the atlantic ocean to the persian gulf is
unified in one powerful state, weighing heavily in the balance of world
power . " even one of nasser's enemies in the arab world the hashemite
kingdom of jordan showed signs last week of being discreetly available
. in his stone basman palace in amman, guarded by circassian troopers
in astrakhan hats, jordan's king hussein deftly shifted prime ministers
. out went muscular wasfi tal, 43, an efficient but nasser-hating
administrator . in came jordan's " man of crises, " five-time prime
minister samir rifai, 62, who has been campaigning in recent months for
more democracy inside jordan and an end to antagonism against nasser .
what's the difference ? after a late night talk, king hussein and
rifai agreed on a new government, looking toward parliamentary
democracy and hussein's eventual retirement to the figurehead role of a
constitutional monarch . they even gingerly accepted the nasser-baath
slogan of " freedom, unity, socialism, " with only the slight amendment
of the final word to read " a better life . " what was still uncertain
last week was whether nasser is prepared to drop or modify his present
determination to unite only with " liberated " arab states and to shun
monarchies . said new jordanian prime minister rifai : " we have our
pride . we are just as healthy and strong as any arab state . we don't
intend to rush into anything, but we do intend to proclaim our good
will and our attachment to arab unity . " then he added hopefully, "
there's every reason for the new arab union to welcome jordan and no
reason to bar a constitutional monarchy . we have more freedom than
many republics . what's the difference anyway between a constitutional
president and a constitutional king ? /
