spain more news, more money spaniards who tuned in on news
broadcasts last week got the surprise of a quarter-century . since
francisco franco installed himself as spain's dictator in 1938, every
newscast had unfailingly ended with a ponderous salute to his falangist
party and a martial rendition of the falangist anthem . last week, for
the first time, news bulletins ended instead with a pleasant feminine
voice bidding senores y senoras good day, followed by a few bars of a
catch paso doble . in slow-moving spain, change of any kind is rare and
reluctant . yet, almost imperceptibly the regime is beginning to relax
its iron grip on society . since his appointment as franco's
information minister last july, manuel fraga iribarne, 40, has boosted
the daily ration of radio news from four to 18 broadcasts a day and for
the first time allowed spanish listeners a comparatively broad sampling
of world events . tale of pasionaria . press censorship also has
mellowed markedly . newspapers are no longer given the old-style daily
instrucciones that laid down what stories they could run and even
dictated how they should be laid out . though the country's biggest
dailies in madrid and barcelona are still subject to censorship, only
15 stories have been doctored by government officials since fraga took
over, and no foreign publications have been seized for political
reasons. in other cities, papers no longer are required to show galley
proofs to the censors before going to press . one weekly is actually
serializing the memoirs of dolores ibarruri, the fabled la pasionaria
of civil war days, who is queen bee of spain's exiled communist party
; her very name until recently was taboo in the spanish press . of the
eight prominent intellectuals arrested last year after denouncing
franco at a munich conference, five have been pardoned and the rest
allowed to go into voluntary exile . franco's uniformed state police,
once everywhere, is now less obvious, less arrogant . gift for
one-fifth . franco's decision to end spain's long cultural and
political isolation is based on his twofold conviction that 1) the
populace as a whole now accepts his regime, and 2) spain cannot survive
economically if it is excluded from the european common market, whose
members bitterly dislike his autocratic ways . the stubborn illegal
strikes that crippled spain's economy for two months last year also
forced el caudillo to recognize that the country's hardpressed workers
are desperately eager to enjoy living standards comparable to those of
other europeans . as a gift to the hopelessly poor unskilled laborers
who make up one-fifth of the work force, franco last week announced an
increase in the minimum wage that will almost double their takehome pay
and fringe benefits (to $1.66 a day) . spain, said franco, in a
year-end tv and radio address, is now " a nation of peace, on the road
to economic recuperation, with a capacity for growth in all sectors of
its life, and with a youth that is technically prepared and eager to
face the future . time alone was banned or seized 54 times in
eleven years by fraga's predecessor .
