morocco a friend in washington in washington's union station last
week, the pennsylvania railroad's ancient private car no . 1750 came to
a hesitant stop . clearly uncertain of the engineer's intentions, king
hassan ii of morocco descended cautiously to the platform, then
displayed a big, engaging smile as he shook hands with president
kennedy, and turned with even more warmth to jackie kennedy, smartly
clad in a spring dress and coat, and dark blue straw hat . lovely rival
. king hassan even produced a rival for jackie in his lovely sister,
princess lalla nezha, 22, who was greeted with a bouquet of red roses .
all the proper protocol was laid on, from a 50-yd . red carpet to an
honor guard . " we are proud to welcome you, your majesty, " said the
president to the king . " your country was the first to recognize the
u.s . in the most difficult days of our revolution . "  king hassan
responded by saying that he had come to the u.s . " to renew my
acquaintance with your people, to meet you and your government . "
thirty-three-year-old king hassan also brought with him crates of gifts
; but left behind in rabat was a small, shiny grey horse with the
moroccan colors of red and green plaited in its mane, which had been
intended for caroline . the state department was courteously adamant :
no more horses for the white house . king hassan chose the u.s . for
his first state visit outside africa to demonstrate that morocco,
though officially unaligned, knows that its real interest lies with the
west . indeed, in the two years since his father died, hassan has
proved to be a sensible leader of morocco's 11.6 million people . three
lovely days . between banquets and receptions, the king and the
president got to know and like each other . hassan even canceled a
scheduled visit to the naval academy at annapolis in order to have
additional talks with kennedy . their conversation ranged over many
world problems, from middle east tensions to cuba, to nato . there was
also quiet affirmation of decisions already taken, including the u.s .
pledge to evacuate three big sac airfields and a naval base in morocco
by year's end, and to continue an unspecified amount of financial aid
to hassan's kingdom (last year's total : $30 million) . king hassan
was impressed by his hospitable reception, which included special
entertainment at the white house (scenes from brigadoon), an unusual
welcome from 100,000 washingtonians lining the streets, and three of
the loveliest spring days in washington memory . the state department
liked the ingelligence and competence displayed by king hassan
throughout the sessions, his serious preoccupation with his own region
of north africa, his judicious comment that morocco would join an arab
union headed by egypt's nasser only after careful study had shown such
union to be " in the common good . " the washington consensus : king
hassan is a " modern reformist " in the tradition of the shah of iran .
as early as spring
1776, france was secretly aiding the infant u.s . against britain with
money and munitions . early in 1778, the sultan of morocco impetuously
decided to recognize the u.s . government and, because of
communications difficulty, tried to do so through a french emissary .
france slipped in ahead, recognizing the u.s . on feb . 6, 1778, v .
feb . 20 for morocco, which, because of prior intent, still likes to
think it holds first place .
