turkey how to stay in trouble when turkey's premier ismet
inonu finally let his old enemy ex-president celal bayar out of jail
for medical treatment fortnight ago, he figured the least he should get
was a little gratitude from the opposition justice party . instead,
bayary supporters turned the occasion into a week-long political
demonstration against the government . five hundred autos filled with
justice party followers formed a traffic-snarling motorcade to escort
the 79-year-old bayar from prison to his ankara home . next day, huge
crowds milled around the house, and 10,000 supporters massed near
parliament to shout his slogans . two sympathetic turkish air force
pilots happily buzzed the city in their jets . growing angry and a bit
nervous over the popular demonstration, the army officers who run
turkey from behind the scenes locked up one batch of exultant bayar men
who stopped their bus in front of the ministry of defense and " made
signs against the army, " then issued an announcement warning that the
/ events threaten national unity . " at this signal, pro-government
demonstrators themselves took to the streets yelling " bayar, back to
your cave, " and ransacked justice party headquarters . in istanbul,
cops tried to prevent a bloody clash by opening both pontoon bridges
across the golden horn, thus separating pro- and antibayar groups .
bayar himself was doing nothing to calm things ,; he publicly attacked
the court at yassiada that sentenced him to prison 18 months ago ;
tearfully, he embraced the son of the late premier adnan menderes,
bayar's colleague who was sent to the gallows by the yassiada tribunal
. throughout it all, premier inonu performed a classic slow burn,
letting the justice crowd have its fun for six days . at last, the
exasperated authorities could take no more, sent bayar off to a
hospital . just a physical examination, the cops assured the old man,
who promptly went on a hunger strike . a guard was put on the door of
his hospital room, and the news soon spread that bayar's parole had
been revoked . the end of the trail might well be the jailhouse again,
for at week's end the public prosecutor began proceedings against him
for talking down the regime in public .
