the congo caesars of the bush an elderly shopkeeper in
elisabethville ignored or perhaps did not hear a congolese soldier's
order to get off the sidewalk in front of the heavily guarded national
bank of katanga last week . angrily, the soldier hoisted his rifle and
shot him in the back . as the man lay groaning on the pavement,
congolese troops shoved away a doctor who tried to save his life . the
cold-blooded killing pointed up the grim fact that nearly three months
after united nations troops crushed secessionist moise tshombe's regime
and placed the province under premier cyrille adoula's central
government, peace is far from restored in katanga . each guard post
that the u.n . hands over to the central regime's armee nationale
congolaise seems to produce a little area of anarchy . in recent weeks,
trigger-happy a.n.c . soldiers in elisabethville have killed at least
one katangese civilian per day . barefoot police . things are almost as
chaotic in the congo's other 17 provinces, where local bush caesars go
their own anarchic ways unimpeded by central authority . in coffee-rich
north kivu, provincial president benezeth moley maintains headquarters
in one room of a general store, runs things with a 300-man police force
recruited from local tribesmen . in maniema province, cold-eyed
president hilarie kisanga enforces discipline with 1,200 barefoot cops
who lounge in the streets armed with lead pipes, and who live off
on-the-spot fines imposed on passers-by . protests a shopowner : " you
walk on the right side of the street and you are fined . you walk on
the left side and you are fined . " the average congolese has little
legal redress . today, in a nation three times the size of texas, there
are only 47 judges to hear complaints all foreigners, imported by the
u.n . from such countries as egypt, sweden, spain and switzerland .
this is just one of the many problems of leopoldville's premier adoula
. lacking funds and trained personnel, he has virtually no control over
his sprawling nation of 17 million largely illiterate people . the
congo's administrative structure has been ripped apart by two years of
civil war, and the chief aim of the national parliament sometimes seems
to be destruction of any central authority . for many weeks, adoula's
government has been on the razor's edge of defeat at the hands of
leopoldville's chaotic legislature, whose debates sometimes verge on
the insane . fortnight ago, for example, as the ragtag chamber of
deputies discussed the congo's proposed new motto " unity, justice,
progress " one speaker opined : " progress' is no good . one can
progress backward as well as forward . " retorted a fellow deputy : "
that goes for " work' too . there is such a thing as bad work . " then
silence fell over the chamber as the president of the body rose to
announce that he had made a startling discovery that changed everything
. " we have just learned, " he intoned, " that this motto is already in
use by west germany . " amid the uproar that followed, deputies were
heard to cry, " who is responsible, who ? "  finally, a portly
deputy named emile zola mounted the dais to plead : " so much the
better . now we will have a twin country in the world . we are
underdeveloped ; germany is overdeveloped ; our brotherhood can only
lead to a good result . " with these shrill cries ringing in their
ears, united nations officials went nervously ahead with plans to pull
out nearly half of the u.n . congo force's peak strength of 19,000
troops by summer's end . the congolese would have to mature some day ;
they might as well begin now .
ignoring the protests of a west german
embassy official in the corridor who kept insisting, " no, no, it's all
a misunderstanding . our motto is " einigkeit, recht, freiheit' unity,
justice, freedom . /
