nyasaland sir edgar & the elders one day in march 1959, in the
british central africa protectorate of nyasaland, harmless-looking
elard chipandale, 31, tied a handful of magic twigs about his waist,
donned a coat of tree bark, and turned himself into a crocodile . he
lay in wait by the bank of the mwanza river for an eight-year-old girl
named mponda simenti . when mponda ambled by on the way to fetch water
for her family, elard the crocodile dragged her into the river, broke
her arm with his lashing tail, and finished her off with his
finger-long teeth . this was elard's own mystical version of what some
might consider merely a case of murder for pay . the girl's
grandfather, odreck kasoci, had sought out elard to get rid of the
annoying child because elard was well known in the neighborhood as a "
magic man, " and therefore qualified to deal with the problem . odreck
agreed to pay $13.50 for the assassination, but when the deed was done,
he reneged . chipandale sued in a native court for his fee and won .
but a government policeman happened in on the proceedings and reported
the two men . last week, in nyasaland's commercial center of blantyre
both men were on trial for murder . elard's ready admission of the
killing did not make things any easier for chief justice sir edgar
unsworth . for elard insisted that he was not guily because he was a
crocodile at the time . sir edgar called in the government's
psychiatrist to test elard's sanity . he was judged not insane, but the
psychiatrist added, " we must admit we are dealing with a mentality
completely foreign to us . " sir edgar turned to the court assessors
three tribal elders for expert guidance . " are you satisfied, " he
asked, " that the prosecution has established that elard was not, on
account of his superstitious belief, under the delusion that he was a
crocodile ? " the three were unanimous in their answer : " he turned
himself into a magic crocodile and seized the child . " sir edgar was
faced with another classic clash of white man's rules with deeprooted
african beliefs . since the two could not be resolved, sir edgar was
forced to make his decision on the basis of social patterns he could
understand . ignoring the elders' testimony, he sentenced both men to
be hanged .
