central africa the crumbling federation as long ago as last
december, it was obvious that the shaky central african federation was
not long for this world . obvious, that is, to everyone but the
federation's prime minister, big- beefy sir roy welensky, who stoutly
insisted that continued presence of the white man in africa " depended
on the maintenance of the union of northern and southern rhodesia .
room sulkers . looking his most bulldoggish, and giving a jaunty
thumbs-up salute, welensky stormed into london last week, prophesying
ruin and anarchy if his warnings were ignored . asked if he would use
federal troops to prevent the secession of black-dominated northern
rhodesia, sir roy replied, " the only time one would use force would be
to maintain law and order . one would not stand by and see things smash
. but if you are asking me whether i would use force to keep the two
rhodesias together, the answer is no, because it would not work . " by
the time welensky checked into the hyde park hotel, nationalist kenneth
kaunda, top african leader in northern rhodesia, had already attended
his first meeting with britain's deputy prime minister r . a . butler
to decide the future course of central africa . of rambunctious sir
roy, kaunda sneered, " we are here to rob him of his job . you might
make him lord broken reed . " with rab butler, kaunda and his fellow
nationalist, harry nkumbula, argued for two hours northern rhodesia's
right to secede, and asked why their country should be considered " the
cinderella of central africa . " when butler refused to make any
promises, the two african leaders walked out and sulked for two days in
their hotel rooms . power seekers . this apparently was enough for rab
butler . he called in welensky and southern rhodesia's prime minister
winston field, a lean, enigmatic farmer who is less interested in the
fate of the federation than in seeing to it that southern rhodesia's
221,000 whites retain political control of the state's 3,600,000 blacks
. butler announced britain's decision : no territory would be kept in
the federation against its will . furious at this " act of betrayal, "
welensky stalked angrily from butler's office and promptly canceled a
luncheon engagement with prime minister macmillan, a snub without
precedent in british commonwealth annals . at a news conference, he
stormed that " these decisions have been taken by her majesty's
government under threat from men who seek power . the people of central
africa, black and white alike, are being betrayed to these men ! "
southern rhodesia's field took the news in stride . now that the
federation was virtually dissolved, field wanted a british guarantee of
independence for southern rhodesia, and presumably a guarantee of its
constitution, which is rigged against the black majority . until such
guarantees are given, said field, he will attend no more conferences .
