russia that strange time i am not retreating one damned step .
it is good to be angry at untruth . so, in the full flush of
destalinization, wrote evgeny evtushenko, 29, the russian poet whose
honest rage at the cant and callousness of soviet society has made him
the idol of his generation . for a while, in fact, it seemed as if
evtushenko (time cover, april 13, 1962) had become a semiofficial angry
young marxist, whose occasional excesses were tolerated by the regime
because they made it appear as if khrushchev's communism could actually
accept criticism . if so, evtushenko pushed his luck too far . vain
apologies . during a swing through france and west germany early this
year, the dashing young poet was lionized at parties (including a
masquerade ball during munich's annual carnival) by pleasure-loving
bourgeois intellectuals . he even held a series of freewheeling press
conferences . heaping scorn on the party fossils whose hackwork wins
the stalin prize each year, evtushenko actually blamed stalin's reign
of terror on the dictator's " close associates " of whom, though he did
not say so, nikita khrushchev is the dean emeritus . the poet's most
audacious gesture of independence was to give the editors of france's
l'express his autobiography for publication, knowing well that no
soviet writer is permitted to publish abroad without first getting
clearance from the censors . cued by khrushchev himself, who recently
rapped evtushenko for " cheap sensationalism, " a three-day meeting of
the union of soviet writers last month addressed itself almost
exclusively to destroying the cult of evtushenko . in all, close to 40
tame authors trooped monotonously forward to denounce evtushenko and
other liberal young writers for offenses ranging from bad rhymes to "
sacrilgeious statements " about the revolution . though evtushenko made
abject apologies for his " irrevocable mistake, " the drumfire of
criticism only grew louder and more insistent . mutter in minsk . last
week the soviet press fumed that evtushenko and other young writers
should not be allowed to travel abroad until they " mature politically
. " when a west german girl was detained at the soviet border on
charges of smuggling caviar, izvestia brought evtushenko into it by
charging that she had met evtushenko in germany and from him had
learned all about " fashionable moscow youth . " in minsk, where dmitry
shostakovich's new 13th symphony was performed for the first time
outside moscow, a critic castigated the composer for basing part of his
score on evtushenko's famed poem, babi yar, a savage indictment of
soviet anti-semitism that the literary commissars have already made
evtushenko revise . though khrushchev was plainly out to make
evtushenko the scapegoat, the campaign against the poet was only part
of a new, systematic attempt to clamp strict party controls on the
theater, music, art, book publishing, industrial design, and every
other field in which young communists might be tempted to voice
independent thoughts . it was once more that " strange time, " as
evtushenko wrote in 1960, " when common integrity could be called
courage . /
