anany egorovich bit his lower lip . he did not know what to do
. eight years ago he would have taken these women by the scruff of
their necks and thrown them into the fields . but now . . . " a wife
with a job . mysovsky visits a father and son who do not work regularly
for the kolkhoz, yet occupy a good house . how do they do it ? " what
are the means ? anany egorovich asked himself . the kolkhoz wages ?
certainly not, sadly enough . who could build themselves a house ?
those who have earnings on the side . there is a custom in the village
: if you work in a kolkhoz, look for a wife who has a regular job in
town . " everyone would rather work for himself and earn more than work
for the collective, he laments . " it's the same old story . a real
vicious circle . in order to be paid well, people should work full
steam, since the kolkhoz has no other resources but their work . but
people will not work for the kolkhoz because they are not well paid .
how can i break the circle ? party officials tell me, " you're not a
good leader . your agitation-educational work is slack.' but how do you
propagandize today's kolkhoznik ? without the ruble the agitation
doesn't reach him . . . that's the whole question . " why bother ?
continuing his tour, mysovsky stops off at the new home of a released
inmate of a slave labor camp . the fellow has a doctor's certificate
that he is too ill to work, lives lavishly by selling produce from his
private plot . " everything at petunya's place was geared to market
needs . instead of a small onion bed he had a real onion plantation,
much better than the ones on the kolkhoz . then there were cucumbers,
potatoes . . . every inch was used . " naturally petunya refuses to help
bring in the harvest . " if i had a cow i might, but otherwise, why
bother ? ' the chairman understands . . . every year thousands of
acres of hay are lost because kolkhozniki get only 10 per cent of the
hay they harvest . in order to feed his own cow he would have to
harvest enough for eight or nine and that's impossible . each year it
gets harder and harder to find workers for the kolkhoz silo . " meeting
his fate . at the end of his rounds mysovsky is dog-tired and
depressed, stops off at the recreation hall for a drink, and promptly
gets plastered . while drunk he promises the workers 30 per cent of the
harvest instead of the regulation 10 per cent , and lo and behold, with
that incentive, they are out in the fields early next day . next
morning, mysovsky wakes up with a hangover, rubs his eyes at the sight
of workers' kerchiefs bobbing like daisies in the fields . then he
remembers . . . " thirty percent ? how could he have said anything of
the sort ? his head might fall for that . he could imagine the cries
of the party bosses : " you have unleashed property-possessing ideas .
you let yourself be led by backward elements.' just the same, thought
the chairman, the workers were out in the fields just because of the
promise of 30 per cent without shouting, demands or discussion . "
mysovsky hastily walked toward the home of the local party boss to
explain things before they put him on trial . the closer he got to the
house, the more frightened he became . on the way, an assistant stopped
him, asked whether he wanted to send additional workers to outlying
fields naturally for the same 30 per cent . " mysovsky nervously licked
his lips, then agreed . now that i am 55, i should be courageous, he
said to himself . he straightened himself up, and went inside to meet
his fate . /
