great britain weekend in washington from the solicitous reception
he got from the new frontier, the little coldeyed man who stepped off
the airliner in washington might have been britain's prime minister
rather than the opposition leader . even in his own labor party six
months ago, pipe-puffing harold wilson was regarded as a slippery
opportunist and a constant threat to the party's hardwon unity under
the late hugh gaitskell . though his views on most major issues were
calculatedly murky, " little harold, " as his foes call him, drew
left-wing support by condemning u.s . handling of cuba, cheering on the
unilateralists, bitterly opposing britain's bid for common market
membership . however, it was not wilson's past that brought out
washington's red carpet but his potential future . even though
elections will probably not be called for at least a year, no u.s .
policymaker could ignore today's gallup polls, which give the labor
party a record 50 per cent to 33f per cent lead over the tories . if
that trend should continue, harold wilson would be britain's next prime
minister . what administration officials got last week was ample
demonstration of the fact that since gaitskell's death, the flinty,
quick-witted
yorkshireman has had to
move closer to the political center to hold the party together and take
hard and fast stands on which britain's electorate can weigh the merits
of a labor government . wilson was plainly anxious to win the new
frontier's confidence . after an intensive, four-day round of
conferences with president kennedy and key administrative hands, the
labor leader's views on most outstanding world issues seemed now at
least as close to u.s . policy as harold macmillan's . " denegotiation
. " wilson's most reassuring message was that he unequivocally supports
nato as " the center of our defense policy in europe . " to the delight
of the defense department, which has long tried in vain to persuade
britain to build up its chronically inadequate ground forces on the
continent, wilson argued that britain could well afford a strong army
if, as he proposes, it were to eliminate its nuclear strike force " the
socalled independent, so-called british, socalled deterrent . " thus,
if elected, wilson would " denegotiate " britain's agreement at nassau
to build a polaris submarine fleet, and hope thereby to discourage
other nations from building independent deterrents . he is strongly
opposed to giving germany a finger on the trigger, which " would be
highly provocative to the soviet union and make it even harder to get
agreements, " particularly on the matter of disarmament . belying
reports that he was " soft " on west berlin, wilson insisted that it
must remain a free and viable city, and that allied troops would have
to be stationed there " for the foreseeable future . " reservations .
there were some issues on which wilson's views were directly at odds
with those of the administration ; u.s . officials were inclined to
shrug them off as lip service to labor's left wing . most important
divergence is his support for withdrawal of nato and soviet troops from
central europe, making " nuclear-free " zones of east and west germany
and hungary a proposal that the u.s . considers impractical and
dangerous . wilson seemed as wobbly as ever on some questions, notably
the common market, which he now conditionally favors . he supports
greater east-west trade, which is not an administration goal, and
favors seating communist china in the u.n., which is directly contrary
to u.s . policy, but he told u.s . officials that these are not
high-priority aims . these views gave reason for continued reservations
about harold wilson . moreover, though his incisive, pragmatic style
undeniably impressed washington, older heads have still to be persuaded
that wilson's convictions will not shift again as they have so many
times before .
