europe an anthology of pros priests and kings, commissars
and parliaments have all tried to put the world's oldest profession out
of business . none succeeded . some sociologists, however, have gamely
predicted that any nation that could eliminate unemployment would also
eliminate prostitution . girls only sold their bodies, the argument
went, because there was no market for their other skills . the mobile
squad . but as prosperous, labor-short western europe last week
prepared for the summer flood of tourists, it was glaringly apparent
that the sociologists had, as usual, guessed wrong . instead of
vanishing, or even declining in numbers, prostitutes swarmed in every
european capital, from copenhagen to rome and from budapest to london .
the european economic miracle did in fact take some prostitutes off the
streets but only to put them in cars . the " klaxon girls " of milan
cruise cathedral square in lancias and dauphines, discreetly tooting
horns and flashing their headlights to attract men's attention . the
latest fashion in copenhagen has been created by " vanprostitutes, "
who cruise the streets in small trucks equipped with beds . in rome,
the first green leaves last week peeped along the lungotevere, and
flowers sprouted behind sidewalk tables on the via veneto . spring had
come, and the ladies could not be far behind . as early as 9 a.m.,
tight-skirted hustlers prowl the square before rome's modernistic
railway station ; by noon, they are ensconced on the benches of the
pincio garden, casting provocative glances over the tops of sunglasses
at passers-by ; by dinnertime, they begin congregating near rome's
biggest supermarket alongside olympic village and beside the vast ruins
of the baths of caracalla . at 9 o'clock, on the corner of via sistina
near the piazza di spagna, the prettiest prostitutes appear, dressed
not as professional hookers but as sweet little schoolgirls . in paris,
the police have succeeded in driving most brothels underground, but an
estimated 20,000 prostitutes are still available to tourists and
domestic males . the most expensive (around $20) work the
champs-elysees, and in a declining order of price and pulchritude come
the girls of the madeleine, the gare montparnasse, place pigalle and
les halles . britain's street offenses act, passed in 1959, has ended
the processions of undulating whores that used to fill up piccadilly
circus, bayswater road and hyde park . borrowing a trick from their
sisters in amsterdam, many london prostitutes now sit at the upper
windows of scruffy soho flats for which they pay as much as $150 per
week . upstairs bar . even the communist bloc has its problems with
prostitution, while indignantly denying that it exists . in hungary,
budapest's few whores are often booked up nights in advance by visiting
austrian and west german businessmen . " elisabeth of the duna, " a
witty little magyar who adorns the upstairs bar of the hotel duna, is
so famous that guards on the austrian border ask travelers, " have you
anything to declare ? did you see elisabeth ? " though flourishing
as never before in western europe, the world's oldest profession is
also continuing to take its accustomed toll . in italy, the number of
reported cases of venereal disease jumped from 1,679 in 1958 to 16,395
last year . in france, during five years of prosperity, venereal
disease skyrocketed by 385 per cent . the pros put the blame on the
semipros, the growing number of young women who work days as
secretaries or salesclerks (at wages ranging from $120 to $150 per
month) and take to the streets at night and remain largely unknown even
to the police . at week's end in paris, women were flocking to movie
theaters to watch absorbedly a new documentary film on prostitution
and, perhaps, pick up a few pointers .
