malaysia forging a
prosperous nation endless rows of rubber trees stretch for miles over a
lush rubber plantation in western malaya . in the early morning hours,
women tappers extract the thick fluid that is the lifeblood of a new
british commonwealth nation that some time this summer will come into
being . it is the federation of malaysia, composed of independent
malaya, self-governing singapore, and british protectorates of sarawak,
brunei and north borneo . malaysia is the dream of malaya's prime
minister abdul rahman, 60, the man on this week's cover . he is a
cambridge-educated lawyer who led his nation to independence in 1957
during its successful, twelve-year struggle against communist guerrilla
insurgents . the largest producer of raw rubber in the world, the new
country will be the most prosperous and bustling nation in southeast
asia, encompassing 129,500 square miles and 10 million people of eleven
ethnic groups ranging from aboriginal tribesmen to millionaire sultans
. menacing its future are the expansionist aims of neighboring
indonesia and the threat of peking-directed communist subversion . but
with its successful creation, malaysia pictured and discussed in the
color pages and cover story that follow could become the strongest
anti-communist bulwark in southeast asia .
malaysia
malaysia will cut a 1,600-mile arc through the south china sea, from
the southern border of thailand through the malay peninsula and
singapore to the north coast of borneo . politically and economically,
malaya is the keystone of the federation . with its population of
7,000,000, malaya will dominate the new nation's government, which will
sit in the malayan capital of kuala lumpur . the melting-pot quality of
the new federation is a reflection of malaya's own
conglomeration of malays, chinese, tamils, pygmy negritos, and other
aboriginal tribesmen in the dank, tangled tropical rain forests of the
interior . off the southern tip of malaya is the island state of
singapore, teeming with 1,700,000 people . one of the largest ports in
the world, singapore has the highest annual per capita income in
southeast asia $450 . singapore's chinese population, with strong ties
to red china, presents the new nation with the pressing
problem of communist domination . but singapore has the most
powerful military installations in southeast asia, will be the home
base for the british army, navy and air force units that will be
malaysia's primary defense . the three tiny colonies of sarawak (pop .
784,000), brunei (pop . 84,000) and north borneo (pop . 480,000),
separated from malaya and singapore by 400 miles of the south china
sea, were included in the federation mainly to redress its population
balance in favor of the non-chinese peoples .
many of the people in the three jungle territories are half-naked
primitive natives who live communally in longhouses, worship animist
water spirits, and hunt with blow guns and poisoned darts ; in north
borneo the dusuns venerate cloud-capped mount kinabulu (13,455 ft.),
highest peak in southeast asia, as the gateway to paradise . as inland
roads are all but nonexistent, river canoes are the main form of
transportation
dusun girls wear rattan bras to market in north borneo .
kadazan miss wears festive garb at catholic mission school .
chinese woman in a singapore temple lights joss sticks as an offering .
malayan policemen have kept order in brunei .
malayan beauty poses by the sultan's palace in kota bahru .
kayan man sports tribal tattoo, pierced ears in sarawak .
indian girl is rubber tapper on malay plantation .
iban wife in sarawak prepares rattan for her weaving .
rich crops & great resources
rice, being harvested in kedah, " rice bowl " of malaya and
home of abdul rahman, is malaya's main food crop . but despite good
yields, area has to import much of the rice it uses 35 per cent in 1961
noodles drying at
roadside factory are made of rice flour . mixed with fish oil and hot
peppers, they are second in popularity only to rice .
oil from fields in tiny brunei has
brought geyser of wealth to british protectorate . but even with modern
rigs, oil production is now falling off, has dropped 37 per cent since
record high in 1956 .
rubber workers trek liquid latex to
plantation smokehouse . rubber is no . 1 cash crop, and malaya accounts
for one-third world's supply .
tin has been mined for
centuries in fields of malaya, which still produce 40 per cent of free
world's supply . european and u.s . firms account for half of
production, while smaller mines are owned by chinese .
pineapple, here being canned in the
modern new factory of lee co., ltd., in johore, has become $10.8
million export, is shipped round world from malaya .
pepper vines in garden near
kuching in sarawak cluster around chinese family's primitive farmhouse
. exported from borneo to europe as far back as middle ages, pepper
still accounts for $8.3 million in foreign trade . ripe berries on vine
are orange-red . black pepper comes from dried berries, premium white
pepper from berries whose skins are soaked off .
divergent people, contrasting creeds
hindu penitents by
thousands surge up and down 370 steps leading to sacred batu caves near
kuala lumpur during thaipusam festival . indians, brought in as workers
at turn of century, are now 10 per cent of malaya's population .
longhouse dwellers
in this home of 17 iban families live in typical communal style .
sarawak's primitive people have forsaken ritual head-hunting, now
prefer peacefully to hunt, farm and weave .
