malaysia manila hummed with excitement as delegates gathered for the
third annual meeting of the association of southeast asia . phalanxes
of motorcycle police escorted shiny official limousines to meetings at
the modernistic pavilion of the national science development board . in
the paneled, high-ceilinged conference room and at diplomatic cocktail
parties, an endless stream of dignitaries strolled up to greet the man
who was the focus of everyone's attention, malaya's stocky, smiling
prime minister abdul rahman, 60, the golf-playing ex-playboy who this
summer will bring into being a new asian nation . to one and all, abdul
rahman happily took credit for the formation of the malaysian
federation . as he puts it, " i am the father of malaysia . " strictly
speaking, this is not true ; the idea has long been the dream of asian
nationalists . for years, britain too has advocated the plan as a neat
way to tie up all its remaining asian colonies (with the exception of
hong kong) into one tidy independent package . but the tunku (it means
prince) was the indispensable catalyst without whom malaysia could not
have been achieved . he wooed, bullied and cajoled the four other
countries into the federation agreement, was the only logical choice to
serve as the new nation's first prime minister . happy, not mighty .
unlike most other new asian leaders, abdul rahman is no rabid
nationalist . he has remained on close, friendly terms with the
british, has no interest in pie-in-the-sky economic schemes . his
political aims are simple : " food instead of bullets, clothing
instead of uniforms, houses instead of barracks . " his new nation has
a combat army of only seven battalions and an air force so small that
the pilots often have trouble finding a fourth for bridge . " my
ambition is not a mighty malaysia, " says abdul rahman, " but happy
malaysia . " but many pressing problems threaten the tunku's ambition .
malaysia's current prosperity is endangered by its dependence on a
one-crop economy . synthetics have already captured half the world's
annual 5,000,000-ton rubber market and forced down the price of latex .
on top of this, brunei's oil reserves are fast depleting . to counter
the economic threat, malaya has embarked on an ambitious
diversification program, is offering a fiveyear tax holiday to new
industries and pushing a big land-development program for new cash
crops . politically, malaysia has already experienced some acute pains
. fearful that a stable new nation will curb communist subversion in
southeast asia, russia has branded the federation " a cunning invention
of london " set up with the " unqualified support of u.s . imperialists
. " both neighboring indonesia and the philippines have launched a
campaign of invective against the whole idea .
walls of prejudice . by far
malaysia's most complex and festering problem is the simmering racial
hostility between the new nation's chinese and malay populations .
throughout the federation, the astute, prosperous, hard-bargaining
chinese dominate business, industry and trade, have economically far
outstripped the rural, easygoing malays . chinese tycoons control north
borneo's booming young timber industry and sarawak's vast, rolling
pepper gardens ; in malaya, abdul rahman's government has complained
that the rich, inbred chinese business community has erected a " wall
of prejudice " against ambitious young malay businessmen . the malays
have built some walls of their own . by malayan law, only onequarter of
the government jobs can go to non-malays, while malays get special
concessions in the granting of scholarships and licenses for new
businesses . rigid citizenship requirements have been set up for the
chinese (malays are automatically citizens), and the borneo territories
plan immigration restrictions to keep chinese businessmen out . "
special privileges are like a golf handicap, " rationalizes malaya's
chinese finance minister tan siew sin . " they are not to hold the
chinese down, but to help the malays along . " golf every morning . it
is ironically fitting that the complicated problems of federation are
the province of a man who, on the face of it, is so uncomplicated
himself . " i am a lazy man, " admits abdul rahman cheerfully, and six
years as malaya's prime minister have not altered his easygoing ways .
the tunku plays golf every morning (handicap : 24), checks the racing
calendar before making advance political engagements, always takes a
nap in the afternoon . an avid soccer fan and sports-car buff, he is
chronically late for appointments, explains : " being punctual always
wears me out . " the tunku has the charisma of the really successful
politician . his title draws enormous respect from the masses, and at
the same time his genuine charm and easygoing manner quickly win their
confidence . though he is a devout moslem, abdul rahman enjoys brandy
and soda ; he is also an excellent curry cook . with his third wife,
sharifah rodziah, and their four adopted children (two of whom are
chinese), the tunku leads a life of cheerful disorder in kuala
lumpur's open, airy prime minister's residence, allows the 70 children
of his servants the run of the house ; visiting diplomats are often
surprised during a conference to see a servant's child wander into the
sitting room and climb up onto the tunku's lap . the tunku has solved
the problem of paper work simply : he does not read it . he has always
had an aversion to the printed page, as a student picked up the knack
of absorbing pertinent passages from books or papers that were read
aloud to him . but though he has no intellectual pretensions, the tunku
commands unswerving loyalty from his brilliant subordinates for his
almost charmed ability to avoid political mistakes . says an aide : "
he understands the malay mind better than anyone else ever has . "
abdul rahman agrees . " i have the feel of the people, " he says . " i
have the touch . " the
tunku's first wife, who died of malaria in 1935, was the mother of his
two children, daughter kathijah, 29, wife of a malayan studying in
britain, and son nerang, 27, now a major in the malayan army . his
second wife was a white englishwoman, violet coulson, whom he married
over the protests of his family ; they were divorced in 1946 .
the playboy prince . abdul rahman
was the seventh son of his father's sixth wife and, with his 44
brothers and sisters, lived the plush life befitting the offspring of
the sultan of kedah . his siamese mother demanded that he be carried to
school on the shoulders of a retainer, and though he was an indifferent
student, his royal birth won him a scholarship to cambridge, where he
began to read law . but the tunku skipped most of his lectures, seldom
missed a tea or dinnerdance, distinguished himself mainly by picking up
28 traffic violations in his silver riley with red fenders . not
unexpectedly, the playboy prince flunked his bar exams . so far down
the line of succession that he had no chance of ever attaining his
father's sultanate, the tunku returned to malaya as a minor civil
servant in a number of remote outposts . on foot and on elephant, he
traveled through the bush getting to know the land and the people, once
even worked as a manual laborer to help build a new mosque, which the
grateful malays named rahmaniah after him . world war ii and japan's
swift conquest of the malayan peninsula hastened abdul rahman's
maturity . as a useful district officer, the tunku was kept on the job
by the japanese . secretly, however, he helped hide escapees from
japanese death camps, kept in contact with british guerrilla units,
which were supplying arms to anti-japanese communist irregulars in the
jungles . " who the hell is he ? " abdul rahman was also in contact
with the malayan independence movement that began to take root when the
japanese ousted the british . with the end of the war, at the age of
42, the tunku returned to england to get his law degree, began to play
a larger part in the cause of merdeka (freedom) . he insisted that it
was the duty of every malay in britain to join the nationalistic malay
society . because of his age and long experience in the civil service,
younger malay students looked to him as their leader, called him
because of his darker skin " black uncle . " in fiery political bull
sessions with youthful follower tun abdul razak, the seeds of a future
political partnership were being sown ; today razak is the most
trusted member of his cabinet . back home, the middle-aging lawyer
joined the united malay nationalist organization, slowly began building
up a political following in his native kedah . in other malay states,
the tunku's firebrand followers from the london days began pushing him
for the party leadership ; finally, in 1951, abdul rahman took over as
boss of the u.m.n.o . " nobody had ever heard of him, " an official
recalls . " i remember people asking " who the hell is he ? " ' they
soon found out . convinced that he could only achieve national
leadership at the head of a multiracial united front, abdul rahman
muted hotly anti-chinese sentiment in his own malay party, stumped the
country urging chinese and indian leaders to unite behind him under the
banner of a new organization called the alliance party . to finance his
crusade, he sold his expensive cars and most of his other property . "
i worked like mad, living and sleeping on trains, " says the tunku . "
i was often home only one day a month . " but abdul rahman's zeal paid
off . in the 1955 general election, the alliance swept 51 of the 52
seats in the federal legislature, and the tunku took over as chief
minister under the british high commissioner . merdeka . abdul rahman
was so busy politicking that he had taken little military interest in
the brutal, bloody guerrilla war that 350,000 british and malayan
troops and home guardsmen were waging against communist insurgents in
malaya's tangled jungles . but after his 1955 election landslide, the
tunku grew afraid that the british might use the emergency to delay
independence, arranged to meet the communist rebel chieftains in
northern malaya to see if some sort of settlement could be worked out .
/ my ideas about communism were determined by that meeting, " says the
tunku . " i became convinced that once a communist, always a communist
. they could never coexist with us in an independent malaya . /
as the war in the jungle began taking a
turn for the better, abdul rahman flintily told britain that the time
was long overdue for malaya's independence . after months of haggling
and delay, the tunku finally forced britain's colonial secretary alan
lennox-boyd (now lord boyd) to the conference table . throughout the
grueling, three-week session in london, the tunku refused to budge from
his ultimatum that independence must come no later than aug . 31, 1957
. " when the siamese have no intention of yielding, they just appear
stupid, " he told subordinates . " i'm half siamese, you know . " at
last, lennox-boyd got the point and caved in . on the tunku's target
date, independent malaya at last came into being . " good old tunku . "
the tunku had no revolutionary blueprint for his new nation, brought
into his cabinet his old london crony, abdul razak, to hammer out a
program for orderly progress . while abdul rahman ground down hard on
red subversives, minister of rural development razak (in the post he
will retain in malaysia's new government) started a program of new
roads, schools and clinics to boost the standard of living in the
primitive kampongs (villages), where the communists were trying to gain
a foothold . in the air-conditioned " operations room " of his
ministry, gadget-loving razak carefully watched the progress of his
bulldozers on dozens of charts, movie screens and map displays, kept
his program constantly ahead of schedule with his cold insistence on
results or else . abdul rahman made no effort to squeeze the british
out of the country, was convinced that the continued economic and
military presence of the british was the best possible insurance for
malayan stability . today a british officer commands the malayan army,
five senior british civil servants hold key positions in malayan
government ministries, and british businessmen control more than half
of the rubber industry, repatriate $86 million in profits annually . "
it's wonderful how this place has flowered since independence, " says
one businessman . " we're really much better off . good old tunku . "
parleys on the green . with his young nation booming, abdul rahman
looked with increasing fear at the predicament of neighboring
singapore, just three-quarters of a mile across the johore strait .
there communism was spreading like an infection among the underfed,
underemployed masses in singapore's squalid, teeming tenement quarters
. by strikes, riots and boycotts, the peking-oriented, communist-front
barisan socialist party tried to topple the tottering government glued
together by singapore's shifty, brilliant, cambridge-educated prime
minister lee kuan yew, 39 . never too choosy about where he got
political support, " harry " lee first tried cooperation with the
communists, later adopted a " leftist, not extremist, noncommunist, not
anti-communist " policy . it did not work ,save his political neck, he
was forced to go for help to an old golfing partner abdul rahman .
lee's vacation house bordered a fairway of kuala kumpur's rambling
selangor golf club, where the tunku shot his daily round . from tee to
green, lee tried to convince abdul rahman that singapore's rickety
coalition could never survive another election, and that a red
singapore could only spell trouble for malaya . gradually, the tunku
came to the frightening conclusion that singapore might well become " a
chinese cuba . " one solution to the " singapore problem " was obvious
: a merger, so that malaya's powerful internal security police could
move in and help singapore authorities hold red subversion in check .
but the tunku shuddered at the prospect of upsetting his nation's malay
racial preponderance by the addition of singapore's 1,300,000 chinese .
/ in order to balance the population, " he says, " i thought of the
borneo territories . /
wining & dining . sarawak, brunei and
north borneo, however, were less than enthusiastic about the federation
scheme . borneo leaders resented being invited to join merely as a
political and racial accommodation, desired instead some sort of
independence of their own . then britain began putting quiet pressure
on the three territorial governments, tried to persuade them that union
in malaysia offered them far more economic and political power than
they could ever achieve by themselves . but it was abdul rahman who
sold the scheme . the tunku wined and dined a continuous stream of
borneo delegations in kuala lumpur, warmed up borneo leaders cool to
the federation with promises of favored political positions in the new
nation . he shrewdly offered the borneo territories 70 seats in the
federal parliament, against only 15 for far more populous singapore and
104 for malaya . he promised tax concessions and a $12 million dollop
of malayan aid annually to the territories, agreed to keep federal
hands off brunei's oil reserves . it was the tunku's fondest hope that
the new nation come into being on aug . 31, 1963, the sixth anniversary
of malaya's independence . then last december came a blow that
threatened to destroy the tunku's timetable . it was the uprising in
brunei . " just too much . " discontent with the sultan of brunei's
corrupt, inefficient and autocratic regime had long been festering in
the tiny, delaware-sized territory . last year the sultan's government
spent only $50,000 on drugs and medicine for its people, while laying
out $47,000 for electrical illumination on the sultan's birthday action
on requests to the government usually took from six months to three
years . the dominant but powerless people's party was also dead-set
against malaysia ; the party's erratic, goateed onetime veterinarian
leader, sheik a . m . azahari, 34, wanted instead to align brunei,
sarawak and north borneo into a single independent state with himself
as its leader . when it finally erupted, the revolt was poorly
organized and badly led . four battalions of britain's tough little
gurkha troops landed on brunei, inside of a week sent the shattered
remnants of the 3,000man rebel army scuttling back into hiding in
brunei's steaming jungles . but the brunei revolt at last gave the
philippines and indonesia, for different reasons, an excuse to display
their opposition to the scheme . oblivious to malaya's success against
red infiltration, the philippines feared that leftists would ultimately
take over the new nation, thus putting a cummunist neighbor right on
their doorstep . dusting off an old claim to north borneo, the
philippines maintained that in 1878 the sultan of sulu had only "
leased, " not sold, the territory to the british . london stiffly
rejected the filipino claim to the region .
indonesia shouted that the turmoil
showed the deep dissatisfaction with malaysia in the borneo
territories, and that the federation was only a plot to extend
britain's colonial influence in asia . rabble-rousing president sukarno
knew that a british-backed, economically viable malaysia would not only
derail his ambition to extend his influence over the borneo
territories, but might also serve as an inducement to rebellion for the
people of depressed indonesian borneo . moreover, abdul rahman has
ignored every " revolutionary principle " for which sukarno stands, has
in the process created a conservative, prosperous nation, while
revolutionary, leftist indonesia, with its 100 million people, has slid
to the edge of economic ruin . says a diplomat :. " to have a little
country like this extending its influence in southeast asia was just
too much for sukarno . " sound ground . in a drumfire of propaganda
outbursts, indonesia hailed the " brunei freedom fighters, " lashed out
at " british mercenaries and puppets, " granted political asylum to
brunei leader azahari, raved that abdul rahman was " round the bend . "
(retorted the tunku : " what can you expect from a pig but a grunt ?
/ ) djakarta mobs hanged the tunku in effigy, and sukarno declared a "
policy of confrontation " against malaya . indonesian jets buzzed
malayan ships in the south china sea, and army leaders darkly
threatened " incidents of physical conflict " along the border of
brunei and indonesia . sukarno did not dare to invade ; he plainly
hoped to induce the united nations to step in and placate him as it did
with west new guinea thus sparing him the necessity of fighting for
what he wants . however, the u.n . seems unwilling to play sukarno's
game ; a u.n . observer team told him that malaysia is " on sound
legal ground . " promise to " brothers . " last week in manila, the
acrid dispute between indonesia, the philippines, and malaysia added an
undertone of tension to the otherwise calm meeting of the association
of southeast asia . not on the official agenda, the malaysia question
came up repeatedly in long private discussions between abdul rahman and
philippines president diosdado macapagal . the tunku was anxious for
the whole matter to be settled quietly . in an attempt to be reasonable
and friendly with his " malay brothers, " he agreed to look into the
filipino claim to north borneo, lukewarmly endorsed a proposal for an
asian summit meeting between himself, macapagal, and indonesia's
sukarno . but the tunku vetoed the suggestion that he postpone the
creation of malaysia until some settlement could be reached ; the
federation, he said, would come into being by aug . 31 as planned .
from the standpoint of language, religion, culture or geography,
malaysia is not a natural nation . but abdul rahman has faced problems
similar to malaysia's in his own malaya and there a decent society has
flourished . he does not promise the moon to his new nation, only a
sane, humane, workable government . under his leadership, malaysia can
be, as john f . kennedy has said, " the best hope of security in that
vital part of the world . /
