the allies at least they're speaking thaw ! cried u.s .
headlines . operation charm ! purred the paris press . the big news,
of course, was that charles de gaulle last week was on speaking terms
with his allies . in paris to attend a meeting of the south-east asia
treaty organization, secretary of state dean rusk chatted " cordially "
with france's president for about 35 minutes, counting time out for
translation . britain's foreign secretary lord home and france's
foreign minister maurice couve de murville, who have been snubbing one
another ever since britain was excluded from the common market last
january, also exchanged civilities . what's more, at an elysee palace
reception for seato delegates from eight countries, le grand charles
affably declared : " security means cooperation . " subs, please . was
this progress ? skeptics noted that france's government seemed more
inclined to talk cooperation than to practice it . after indicating
that they might honor a 15-month-old agreement to accept
u.s.-controlled warheads for its german-based f-100 fighterbombers, the
french brusquely denied that they had any present plans " concerning
the use of these planes within nato . " nothing daunted, u.s .
officials in paris leaked wishful reports that france's nuclear force
de frappe is badly behind schedule and beset with evermounting
technical and financial problems . de gaulle, it was hinted, was about
ready to return to the nato fold . not so, retorted a high-ranking
french official . france, he insisted, will have its first 50 mirage iv
a-bombers in service by december 1965, on schedule ; expects to have
its own h-bomb " well before " 1970 ; and is actually ahead of
schedule with its missile-launching submarine, now due in 1968 . thus
de gaulle had no reason to back away from his declared aim of nuclear
independence . as the gaullist paris-presse pointed out, " it is his
partners who have greatly changed their tone " since the general
rejected the u.s . offer of nato-committed polaris missiles last
january . the u.s . was still pushing its long-term plan for a surface
polaris fleet manned by mixed crews . however, britain has little
enthusiasm for the idea, while west germany and italy, which were both
enthusiastic at first, have now indicated that they would rather sink
their money in multimanned polaris submarines . what the u.s . did win
last week was substantial agreement from its allies excluding france on
the general outline of a more limited scheme, the inter-allied,
natocontrolled strike force that washington hopes to create in the near
future . just a gimmick ? after a nato session in paris and
conferences in london attended by rusk, defense secretary mcnamara and
other top policymakers, the u.s . announced that it would present next
month's nato meeting in ottawa with detailed plans for a nuclear
command and planning structure to integrate the new inter-allied force
. it would include britain's v-bombers and, in 1968, its polaris fleet,
as well as three polaris submarines that the u.s . has committed to
nato, and other allied aircraft and missiles . some allied planners
dismissed the u.s . proposals as mere " gimmickry . " but after all it
was western europe that had been clamoring for a greater role in
nuclear weapons policy . now washington had produced a plan that would
go a long way toward meeting this demand . most european countries
seemed anxious to cooperate . paris remained stiffly aloof, suggesting
only that in the event of war, its own deterrent might be " coordinated
/ with a nato nuclear force . if any u.s . officials really believed,
as they said last week, that the french had shown a more " positive "
attitude toward the western alliance, they gravely misjudged the aims
of charles de gaulle . snapped a german diplomat : " of course the
crisis isn't over . and it won't be as long as de gaulle is around . "
