middle east union now the arab world last week reeled in
a delirium of joy . damascus radio repeatedly shrieked, " ahlan bil
wahda ! " (welcome to union) . when syrian soldiers sent bursts of
tracer bullets streaking against the night sky, the radio announcer
hastily told his excited listeners that it was not revolution but
jubilation . the dream has come true ! headlined a beirut paper .
aleppo nearly exploded : its main streets became a sea of screaming
humanity, and cars inched along honking their horns to the rhythm, "
nas-ser ! " algeria's premier ahmed ben bella cabled that this was "
the most wonderful day of my life ! " and yemen's strongman, abdullah
sallal, hailed the " outstanding historic event . " cheering crowds
milled through aden and kuwait and baghdad . festering wound . what
thrilled the arab world was the cairo announcement that egypt, syria
and iraq had at last agreed to unite in a tripartite federation . the
terms of union were far stronger and more centralized than arabs, or
anyone else, had expected . there had been much talk of a loose
association of nations moving slowly over the years toward actual unity
. but the pulsing enthusiasm of the moment apparently swept aside much
of the earlier restraint . a few dozen men in cairo were groping for
the political blueprint for a nation stronger, richer and more powerful
than any arab state for centuries past . if it all works out, the
proposed new middle eastern power complex will cover 620,300 sq . mi.,
stretch from the borders of turkey and iran to sudan and libya, from
the persian gulf to the mediterranean and far down the red sea coast .
it would have a population of 40 million people (expected to reach 80
million by 1985, greater than the largest nation of western europe) and
a total gross national product of $5.7 billion . hero of the hour was
egypt's president gamal abdel nasser . better than any man, he knew
that, on the historical record, the odds were against success . time
and again, the cherished dream of arab oneness has been shattered on
the irrationality of arab behavior, on personal rivalries, ambitions,
class differences and complicated levantine intrigues . amid shouts of
arab joy, egypt and syria forged the united arab republic in 1958, only
to see it collapse in a welter of bickering three years later . during
the past five weeks of negotiations in cairo, rumors spread of
wrangling and dissension between nasser on one side and the syrian and
iraqi leaders of the socialist baath party on the other . both picked
at the " festering wound " caused by baath's breakup of the earlier,
ill-starred union of egypt and syria in the united arab republic . each
put the blame for failure on the other . finally, at a plenary session
in the giltand-cream great hall of kubbah palace, nasser proposed a
sharing of guilt . " the presence of baath in the arab homeland is a
necessity, " he declared . " the resignation of the baath ministers
from the u.a.r . government in 1961 was a mistake . accepting the
resignations was also a mistake . " the baathist delegates clapped and
cheered this burying of the hatchet . in a startlingly un-arab spirit
of amity and compromise, both sides accepted the other's good faith and
minimum terms .
cheerful borrowing . the points of agreement announced
by egypt's premier ali sabry include a federal state retaining the name
of the united arab republic, with cairo as its capital . all citizens
would share one nationality, but each of the three regions would be
self-governing and in control of its separate economy . the overall
government based in cairo would have a single president (almost
certainly nasser), a presidential council with members from each region
and a bicameral legislature : a house with one member for each 60,000
citizens, and a senate representing the regions equally without regard
to population . the arab press cheerfully admitted that much was
borrowed from the u.s . constitution because it provided the " ideal
form of union as proven by experience . " sticking point is nasser's
insistence on a single political party for the whole
u.a.r., modeled on his own arab socialist union in egypt . since this
would swallow up and probably destroy the baath movement, baathists
have held out for a looser, more representative system, including the
baath-created national front in iraq, and the baathist-nasserite
unionist front in syria . in the end, nasser would probably have his
way on this, as on other limitations to political democracy . a cairo
spokesman explained, in a phrase definitely not borrowed from u.s .
democracy, that " freedom will be guaranteed to the people, but not to
the enemies of the people . " there are many lesser matters still to be
decided . committees would be assigned to work out details of currency,
customs, postage, diplomatic and other policies . foreign affairs would
be under the new u.a.r . government, and embassies abroad would be
merged . the u.a.r., however, may try to hang on to its three united
nations seats in much the same way that the soviet union controls the
votes of the ukraine and byelorussia . freed slaves . many observers
suspect that this new ship of state may go swiftly on the rocks, but
few of them are in the arab world . twelve members of oil-rich kuwait's
50-man legislature formally requested unity with the u.a.r . even
nasser's traditional enemies, the monarchies of jordan and saudi
arabia, made efforts at reconciliation . jordan's king hussein
discreetly let 56 nasserite and baathist political prisoners out of
jail and sent off friendly feelers to nasser . in saudi arabia, alarmed
by a pro-nasser demonstration that cost 19 lives, premier prince feisal
tried to modernize his regime by allotting $1,200,000 as compensation
to slave ownerswho would free their chattels . at week's end cairo
radio was spreading word of a cease-fire by mutual agreement in
rebellion-torn yemen . it said that saudi arabia was prepared to stop
supplying the royalists supporting ex-imam badr with money and
munitions, while nasser may withdraw a token contingent of his
28,000-man egyptian expeditionary force by april 20 . though nasser's
broadcasters are not the most reliable sources in the world, things may
well come to this, for without doubt jordan and saudi arabia and all
other arabs are becoming increasingly anxious to avoid angering nasser
