luxembourg millennium in camelot on an april day in 963, count
sigfroi, a wagnerian warrior from the ardennes, raised his banner over
a fortress on a formidable rock above the alzette river in the eastern
frankish empire . though sigfroi's wife soon vanished she turned out to
be a water nymph and his fortress crumbled, the fief he founded proved
as durable as it is diminutive . it is formally known today as the
grand duchy of luxembourg and, though international surveys often omit
its statistics entirely, it is a thriving charter member of the
european coal and steel community and the common market, as well as the
smallest country in the united nations, in whose behalf it sent an
armed and eager platoon to korea in 1951 . last week, as they marked
their country's 1,000th anniversary, the solid, easygoing
luxembourgeois looked forward to a long summer of low-key celebration,
including a dog show, endless wine festivals, an international stamp
exposition, and a visit by two planeloads of kinfolk from chicago,
which is said to boast more luxembourgeois than luxembourg (pop .
320,000). the mystery is why they ever left in the first place . dial
219-61 . the grand duchy today is a sort of constitutional camelot . it
boasts 130 castles (but no university), pristine forests where wild
boar are still hunted, crystalline rivers that teem with crayfish,
trout and, of course, water nymphs . the luxembourgeois, who are
walking advertisements for their cuisine (famed specialties : thrush
pie and partridge canape), brag that it is " french in quality, german
in quantity . " in other respects as well, they claim to have europe's
highest living standards . there is neither unemployment nor slums ;
illiteracy was banished in 1847, and the duchy's booming steel industry
is one of the world's most productive . " luxembourg, " its citizens
say with satisfaction, " belongs to the luxembourgeois . " politically,
luxembourg is a familystyle democracy in which street cleaners greet
the prime minister by his first name . if a citizen gets mad at the
government, he has only to dial 219-61 to hear a telephone operator
reply, " the government, " and direct him promptly to the appropriate
official . for economy's sake, virtually every member of the cabinet
runs at least two ministries . premier pierre werner, 49, who is also
minister of finance, is a genial, tireless christian socialist who
bustles around the country in an ancient official buick as concernedly
as if the grand duchy all 999 square miles of it were about to melt
away altogether . a lot to offer . actually, political crises are few
and far between in placid luxembourg . through tactful treatment of
minorities, the government has avoided the fate of neighboring belgium,
where bitter antagonisms between flemish and french-speaking citizens
are a constant threat to stability . the luxembourgeois, who speak
french, german and a gobbledydeutsch called mosel-frankisch, do not
even have an official language . they are 96.9 per cent catholic, but
the government pays the salaries of the country's sole rabbi and its
only protestant minister . even the country's few communists profess
loyalty to the royal family . titular head of state since 1919 has been
the handsome, highly esteemed grand duchess charlotte, 67, who later
this month will pay her first official visit to the u.s . since she
escaped in world war ii to head her government in exile . indeed,
though they put up a heroic resistance against the germans in two world
wars, in peacetime the luxembourgeois keep to themselves as a matter of
principle . some western diplomats would like to see the country play a
more assertive role in world affairs . " they have a lot to offer, "
argues one . " internationally, luxembourg is the voice of 20th century
europeanism, the voice of reason in the common market, nato and the u.n
. but it is too modest . " in fact one of president kennedy's
underlying reasons for inviting the grand duchess to washington is to
suggest that luxembourg should use its moderating influence more
readily . but the luxembourgeois are not likely to change their ways .
/ when cats fight, " they explain, " kittens should stay out of the way
. /
many also emigrated to new england, notably franklin roosevelt's
maternal ancestors, the delanos (originally delanois), whose old
castle in northern luxembourg now houses a first-class hotel .
