hungary " while we wait " for hungarian writers and artists,
whose demands for freedom inspired the 1956 revolution, word of
russia's restalinization of culture at first caused a bad case of
jitters . yet last week, in striking contrast to the clamp-down in
moscow, budapest seemed almost relaxed . said cultural commissar istvan
szirmai : " the party will be tolerant . all artistic and literary
creations which are not anticommunist will be allowed . " hungarian
intellectuals earned their meager allowance the hard way . communist
boss janos kadar, after betraying his country to the kremlin during the
uprising, for four years tried to whip the country into submission by
brutal use of police terror . but kadar eventually learned that he
could not force the sullen hungarians to cooperate . with his civil
service in tatters and economy a shambles, he gradually relaxed
controls, even began naming non-communist experts to key industrial
jobs . " he who is not against us is with us, " said kadar in late 1961
. such relative leniency in a communist state at last earned kadar a
measure of grudging acceptance from the population ; fortnight ago he
took his biggest step yet by releasing the last group of revolutionary
leaders who were still in jail (although up to several hundred
rank-and-file freedom fighters are still believed to be behind bars),
and by setting the stage for the release of josef cardinal mindszenty
from his refuge in budapest's u.s . legation (time, april 12) . happy
enough to be outside the cells, hungarian intellectuals, traditionally
an enthusiastically undisciplined bunch, avoided provoking fresh
trouble ; for one thing, they know that soviet tanks are always ready
to rumble into the city . as laszlo nemeth, a respected non-communist
author, puts it : " we hungarians live today in a new apartment block
which many people find ugly . it became clear in 1956 that the block
cannot be demolished . while we wait behind the facade for its
transformation into something better, let us at least make our own
flats as habitable as we can . /
