south korea silent sam, the pressure man the white house put the
squeeze on the blue house last week, and south korea's month-long
political crisis vanished for the moment . bowing to washington's
wishes, general park chung hee, who occupies seoul's blue-roofed
presidential mansion, agreed to let civilian politicians have their say
at least until next autumn . the victory belonged in large part to the
man who relayed the u.s . pressure, short, wiry, u.s . ambassador
semuel d . berger . called " silent sam " by the korean press for his
reluctance to make public pronouncements, careerist berger, 51, is a
discreet, behind-the-scenes diplomat . when general park
last month imposed a new ban on civilian political activities and
announced a referendum designed to keep his military junta in power for
another four years, berger set about the task of convincing the general
that he must abide by his pledge to president kennedy 17 months ago to
restore civilian rule in 1963 . berger's lever was the u.s.'s annual
$500 million aid program to south korea, without which park's
government could not remain solvent . to a steady stream of top korean
officials who came to the fourstory u.s . embassy in downtown seoul,
berger explained that the u.s . might have to re-examine its aid
program unless park let the civilians come back . to show that berger
was not bluffing, the u.s . recently delayed a promised $25 million
desperately needed by south korea to pay for import purchases . when
park finally caved in last week, agreeing to wait until september to
decide whether to call for free elections or a vote on his referendum,
civilian politicians were at first inclined to grumble at park's
compromise . but in fact, they needed that much time to organize their
parties for an election campaign . the civilians knew who their most
potent opponent would be : general park himself, who no doubt would
use the six-month postponement to build up a grass-roots political
organization strong enough to help him switch from fatigues to flannels
and take office as a civilian president .
