corsica jesus for a night and he bearing his cross went forth :
. st . john 19 : 17 promptly at 9 : 30 p.m . on good friday last
week, a grotesque lump of a man emerged from the medieval roman
catholic church in corsica's olive-growing village of sartene .
barefoot, masked in a blood-red hood with eye slits, the bent figure
staggered under the weight of a massive oak cross . from his right
ankle dragged a clanking, 31-lb . chain . and from under the hood came
an anguished, muffled chant : " perdonno, mio dio . . . perdonno . . . "
thus, as it has every spring since the middle ages, began one of the
world's most brutally powerful easter week processions . the hooded
figure was that of a conscience-stricken french sinner whose identity
was known only to the local curate, father jean baptiste scuitti . from
wherever he had come, the man was there voluntarily to atone for his
sins by enacting the role of christ making his way to calvary . to
corsicans, as always, he was known only as le catenacciu (the enchained
one) . so popular is the part that it is booked solid for the next 40
years by applicants from as far away as madagascar . the list includes
gamblers, adulterers, ex-convicts all seeking peace of mind . with it,
they get an awful lot of exercise . the procession, chuckles father
scuitti, " is no evening promenade . " in last week's mock trip to
calvary, a short, fat man grunted and puffed as he bore the cross along
a mile-and-a-half route . coming out of the church, the catenacciu got
his huge load stuck in the doorway . then, as he stumbled along dirt
paths and darkened, cobbled streets, struggled painfully up flights of
ancient granite stairs, his bare feet began to bleed . throngs of
villagers and 15,000 tourists in sartene for the occasion gathered
along the route to jeer . three times the catenacciu fell under his
burden, and each time a fellow penitent playing the part of simon of
cyrene whispered fiercely : " get up ! you asked for this ! " at
last it was all over, and as the enchained one was whisked away in
father scuitti's renault, candles were lit in every sartene window .
