the $5,000,000 bingo parlor if prostitution is the world's oldest
profession and gambling the most profitable, what have you got when you
combine the two ? a gold mine or so south korea's ruling junta
thought when it dreamed up walker hill, a sprawling, 156-acre complex
of gaming tables and hot-pillow hotels designed to entice the tourist
trade and, not incidentally, the 40,000 u.s . troops stationed in korea
. out to manila and macao went the call for croupiers, and four
americans from las vegas moved in to manage the action . but when it
opened up ten miles outside seoul last week, the monte carlo of the
orient proved to be little more than a $5,000,000 bingo parlor with
soda fountains . the troubles for walker hill (named after the late u.s
. general walton walker, who commanded u.n . forces during the korean
war) began when its architects, who had never designed a hotel,
positioned bungalows so artistically and precariously on the hillsides
that a good rainfall threatened to slide them majestically into the han
river ; the management is now frantically planting trees to stop mud
slides . then public funds appropriated for the project mysteriously
started turning up in private pockets ; eight top walker hill
officials are currently under arrest or investigation for embezzlement
and bribery . so bad was walker hill's credit rating that louis ( "
satchmo " ) armstrong, whose band got $60,000 for playing the opening
two-week stand, " didn't even think of making plane reservations to
come here until our fee cleared the bank back home . " the worst blow,
however, came when g.i.s' mothers back in the u.s . heard about the
affair . fear that the u.s . army would declare the place off limits
forced project officials to ban gambling, except for bingo and slot
machines . as for girls, potential hustlers were told to peddle their
wares elsewhere, though one walker hill official admitted that, " while
we do not allow prostitution, we are not going to insist on couples
producing a marriage license . " there was a mad rush to get the place
ready for last week's gala opening, and guests were somewhat surprised
to find that the showers worked, sheets were on the beds, and the roast
beef in the dining room was not bad at all . but without its two major
attractions, walker hill, in all its motel modrun splendor, was still
half empty . because of the junta's slogan, " austerity for progress, "
south koreans were not allowed inside unless they came as guests of
foreigners . this policy might have to be changed . as one observer put
it : " if the government wants to make a go of this place, they'll
have to let the south koreans in and probably the north koreans too . "
