central africa colonialism in reverse most british colonial
governors ultimately reach the point where they stand by, erect and
proud, as the union jack flutters down over some distant possession and
the flag of independence is run up . as the new session of parliament
began in salisbury, southern rhodesia, last week, the pattern of noble
withdrawal was broken by lord dalhousie, governor-general of the nearly
extinct central african federation . required by tradition to read the
speech drafted by the local white government, lord dalhousie,
resplendent in a plumed cocked hat and silver epaulets, delivered a
sharp rebuke to britain because it " has betrayed the people of the
federation and has done them irreparable harm . " as if to rub the
british governor-general in the federation's plight, burly federation
prime minister sir roy welensky then rose to rail at britain's "
unparalleled treachery and deceit . " chin out, fists clenched, his
voice trembling with anger, welensky cried, " the interests of the
white man and the ordinary moderate african in his thousands are being
sacrificed in a long-drawn-out act of appeasement which puts munich in
the shade ! " he charged that britain intends the continent as a
whole to " be handed over to racialism, whether the cost be a congo or
an algiers . " what infuriated welensky was that britain has already
agreed to give independence to the two black-controlled states of
northern rhodesia and nyasaland, while reserving decision on southern
rhodesia (where 250,000 whites currently rule 4,000,000 blacks) until
an african conference is held this summer . in reply, southern
rhodesia's prime minister winston field repeated his refusal to attend
any such conference until he receives in writing from britain's deputy
prime minister r . a . butler a promise that southern rhodesia gets its
independence concurrently with either of the other two states . rab
butler's answer last week was that the conference settling the details
of the dissolution of the federation must be held first, which makes
the situation like so many in africa appear insoluble . fleeing a
police rap, southern rhodesia's black nationalist joshua nkomo showed
up in tanganyika to declare his determination to fight the whole idea
of southern rhodesia independence under white rule . viewing the
deadlock, britain's spectator commented : " what now exists in
southern rhodesia is a colonial situation in reverse, " that is, the
africans themselves earnestly hope britain will retain what power it
has, while the white settlers are demanding instant freedom .
