mauritania daddah knows best when mauritania won its
independence in 1960, sovereignty and sand were about all it had .
sprawled across the lower sahara on africa's atlantic hump, the arid
nation is twice the size of france but has only 800,000 people and an
average per capita income of less than $80 yearly . nonetheless since
1956 morocco has been struggling to annex " the stolen sands of
mauritania, " which it claims were illegally taken from colonial
morocco by french army surveyors the late king mohammed v, a " moroccan
liberation army " even tried to " free " mauritania ; with support
from russia, morocco managed to keep the new nation out of the u.n .
for a whole year . defying morocco, mauritania's sorbonne-educated
premier moktar ould daddah, 38, has argued all along that there is no
historical basis for union, and that the two countries have neither
language nor ethnic origins in common . one by one, the former french
colonies that backed morocco's claims have all dropped out of the
battle . algeria's militant ahmed ben bella allowed recently that
mauritania's nationhood is a " reality . " last week even neighboring
mali, which also claimed part of mauritania and permitted pro-moroccan
guerrillas to raid the desert nation a year ago, finally buried the
hatchet . with royalties beginning to flow into his treasury from big,
western-financed iron-ore mines, ould daddah cut off the $4,000,000
annual subsidy his government has been getting from france, thus
effectively answering african taunts that he is a " valet of the french
. " however, even though there turned out to be gold (and iron) in
mauritania's sands, it has become increasingly plain that morocco's
pragmatic young king hassan ii does not share his father's fervent
faith in a " greater morocco " and realizes, in any case, that its big
neighbor is here to stay . moreover, the king now has sufficient
political strength to resist pressure from the nationalist istiqlal
party, most dogged advocate of mauritania's annexation . last week, he
decided to repatriate four prominent mauritanian exiles who had been
leading the campaign against their country from morocco for several
years . in may, when africa's leaders meet for a " summit " conference
at addis ababa, hassan is expected to make morocco's new policy
official .
