laos beckoning the undertaker " the clouds are still hanging in
the air and the weather looks bad, " said a diplomat in vientiane last
week . his gloomy forecast was prompted not by the upcoming rainy
season, but by the festering, communist-induced political crisis that
is slowly turning " neutral " laos into a red satellite . for months on
the plaine des jarres, headquarters of both the neutralist and
communist pathet lao armies, the reds have been slowly squeezing their
former neutralist allies in an effort to drive them off the grassy
plateau . defying last summer's 14-nation geneva accords guaranteeing
laotian neutrality, the pathet lao is still reinforced by communist
viet minh cadres from north viet nam ; to the north of the plaine des
jarres, red chinese troops are building roads linking china with
red-controlled laos itself . slowly the communists have been pinching
off supplies to neutralist army leader general kong le and bribing his
officers to defect . last week, with kong le's food and ammunition
rations down to the two-day level, the reds, in a blaze of gunfire,
sliced off another chunk of neutralist territory at xiengkhouang, just
south of the plateau . " foreign lackeys . " trouble began when the
pathet lao, supported by the viet minh, opened fire on a group of kong
le's soldiers fishing in their off-duty hours near the town of khang
khay . then the reds advanced on the neutralist stronghold at
xiengkhouang, and launched a mortar barrage that forced kong le's
forces out of the town . with full-scale civil war threatening to break
out on the plaine des jarres, kong le evacuated the wives and children
of his men to the laotian capital of vientiane, 120 miles away . as the
bedraggled neutralist forces tried to fight their way back to the
plateau from xiengkhouang, the reds attacked once more with artillery
and bazookas, inflicting heavy losses on kong le's troops . the
treacherous red attacks completed the political transformation of kong
le, who once was the darling of moscow and peking . two and a half
years ago, kong le had joined forces with the pathet lao on the plaine
des jarres and with them demanded the withdrawal of all the western
troops in laos . but consistently neutralist, kong le today is as
bitterly opposed to viet minh intervention in laos as he had been to
the presence of u.s . military advisers last october . fortnight ago he
raged that the viet minh were " foreign lackeys " who hoped to make
laos their base to spread their evil policies thoughout southeast asia
. heart in france . last week kong le was desperately urging his old
right-wing foes to send troops to his aid on the plaine des jarres .
but ineffectual neutralist premier souvanna phouma feared that any such
determined action might unglue his tottering left-right-center
coalition . souvanna could not even keep order in vientiane, where last
week another top neutralist the second in a fortnight was gunned down
in his own house . " i don't know which foot to dance on, " said
souvanna plaintively . " i wish i was on the seashore in france with my
family . " at week's end, after the reds had consolidated their hold on
xiengkhouang, the international control commission of canada, poland
and india, which had been set up by the geneva conference to police
laotian neutrality, finally got approval from the pathet lao to fly
into the plaine des jarres on a peacemaking mission . meanwhile the
u.s., shuddering at the prospect of another massive military commitment
in southeast asia, was hopeful that the onset of the rainy season would
stall off major hostilities . the most that optimistic u.s . officials
could hope for in laos was a continued stalemate ; realists felt,
however, that an eventual communist takeover was only a matter of time
. " asking what you can do sensibly about laos is like asking a patient
close to death to come in every two months to see what his doctor can
do for him, " said one ranking u.s . insider . " after a while, there
is nothing you can do but call the undertaker . /
