help us ! " slam out of the swirling snow of a moscow winter
morning last week, 32 shabby peasants suddenly appeared at the iron
gates of the u.s . embassy at 19-21 tchaikovsky street, brushed past
the russian guards on the sidewalk, and strode inside . to
flabbergasted american diplomats they put a startling request : help
us get out of russia . the six men, twelve women and 14 children clad
in tattered sheepskin coats and babushkas were a forlorn lot with a
forlorn tale . they came from a sect of protestant pentacostal
evangelists in the siberian town of chernogorsk, near the mongolian
border 2,100 miles to the east . of late, local authorities there had
taken away several children of the sect, and threatened to imprison the
adult faithful . with the vague notion that a foreign embassy might
help them, the siberians went by train to moscow . now they wanted to
travel to " israel " probably meaning the israel of the old testament .
the americans listened sympathetically, but ambassador foy kohler had
to stick to regulations. out went a call to the soviet foreign
ministry, explaining the situation and asking that the peasants be
removed . meanwhile, the siberians were invited into the embassy
lunchroom to have coffee and cake . embarrassed by the whole thing, the
u.s . officials prevented foreign correspondents from photographing or
speaking with the visitors . at last, a dilapidated bus drove into the
embassy compound and backed up to the lunchroom door . with it came
soviet foreign ministry agents, who urged the peasants to come along
quietly . " come now, let's not have a demonstration, " said one . "
where will you take us ? " a siberian inquired . " to a hotel, "
replied the official . " then we will arrange for you to go back home .
/ by then, the women were wailing . one peasant yelled, " but i do not
want to go back ! they will arrest me and shoot me ! " to a cluster
of newsmen standing near by, he cried, " we ask all brothers and
sisters who believe in god : help us ! help us ! " then the bus
drove away into the snow . the state department later explained
that it is u.s . policy,
as a rule, to deny asylum to foreigners in embassies abroad unless the
person is in " imminent danger from mob violence . " josef cardinal
mindszenty, roman catholic primate of hungary, was considered to
qualify " under exceptional circumstances " when he won sanctuary in
the u.s . legation during the 1956 uprising in budapest, where he still
lives .
