laos a new civil war ? just nine months after the
14-nation geneva conference guaranteed laotian neutrality, laos last
week tottered on the brink of civil war and once again threatened to
drag the major powers into a bitter struggle . for three weeks, the red
forces, reinforced by cadres of viet minh troop commanders, mortar
specialists and artillery advisers from communist north viet nam, had
been nibbling away at neutralist positions around the 30-mile perimeter
of the grassy, pool-table-flat plaine des jarres . strategically placed
in the center of laos, the plain named after the ancient stone burial
jars still found in the area controls the approaches to the rest of the
country and is the primary access route to north viet nam . with the
plaine des jarres in their hands, the reds could solidify their hold on
all of northern laos . last week this gloomy prospect was all but a
fact, as 10,000 red troops poured onto the plain, forcing the
neutralists to its very edge . cigarettes & bullets . the week began
with a desperate flight to the plain by neutralist premier souvanna
phouma, who hoped it still might be possible to arrange a cease-fire
between the communist pathet lao and neutralist army chief kong le .
things seemed cheery enough as the opposing leaders embraced and their
troops exchanged cigarettes . but, as one neutralist put it, " we
exchange cigarettes during the day and bullets at night . " all too
true . hardly had souvanna departed when the truce abruptly collapsed .
no one knows who fired first, but all of a sudden the pathet lao was
shooting, and the neutralists were running . on the dusty plaine des
jarres airstrip, mothers breastfed dirty babies, and children sagged
under the weight of parachute packs crammed with household belongings
as they patiently waited for planes to evacuate them to the laotian
capital of vientiane, 120 miles away . in his ramshackle, tin-roofed
headquarters, guarded night and day by a patrolling platoon of tanks,
kong le worked round the clock drawing up a battle plan, although
weakened by a liver ailment and a serious sinus condition . " this, "
he said, " is the final showdown . " moving over the mountaintops and
through the passes girdling the plain, the reds at last surrounded the
six-mile-long plateau . from the heights, the communists laid a mortar
barrage on the airfield, kong le's last remaining lifeline to vientiane
. with the airstrip inoperable, kong le was forced to rely on runners
as his primary means of communication ; he had no choice but to pull
together what was left of his shattered forces and move off the plain .
pressure from two quarters . kong le's retreat caused consternation in
vientiane . with his left-right-center coalition fast coming unstuck,
premier souvanna phouma was fearful that kong le's troops would join
forces with a right-wing army just southwest of the plaine des jarres
and launch a joint counterattack against the reds that would surely
precipitate civil war . desperately he appealed to britain and russia,
overseers of the geneva agreement, for quick intervention to stop the
pathet lao's flagrant violations of the cease-fire . russia hesitated
to intercede, for fear of alienating the communists in laos and north
viet nam . soviet intervention at this stage might turn them
increasingly toward red china, russia's rival, for support in their
revolution . but nikita khrushchev was also under pressure from a
different quarter . in washington, president kennedy made it clear that
he expected moscow to put a stop to pathet lao pressure and live up to
the geneva agreement . " we will, i think, have a chance to see in the
next few days whether we are going to have a destruction of that accord
whether the soviet union and other signatories are going to meet their
obligations, " said kennedy . tougher u.s . action could not be ruled
out if the communists showed signs of moving south from the plaine des
jarres into the mekong river valley itself . this would strengthen
their supply routes to communist guerrillas fighting in neighboring
south viet nam, where the u.s . is deeply committed with both men and
money . though the state department dreaded the thought of any further
military involvement in southeast asia, officials made it clear that
more troops might be brought into the area to safeguard laotian
neutrality .
