south viet nam the great emancipator for more than a year, the
u.s . has been urging south viet nam's president ngo dinh diem to
declare a general amnesty for communist viet cong guerrillas in order
to encourage wholesale desertions from the red cause . diem was in
favor of the idea . but he always replied that as abraham lincoln
waited two years after the beginning of the civil war before issuing
his emancipation proclamation, he, too, would wait for a propitious
moment so that the move could not be interpreted as a desperate gesture
by a sinking government to round up popular support . last week,
confident that the war against the reds had taken a turn for the
better, diem finally proclaimed an " open arms " clemency program .
diem's declaration was speeded by the encouraging results of an
informal government clemency program in effect since february that has
caused the defection of more than 2,700 viet cong followers, including
several minor red officials . under the terms of the new proclamation,
red defectors " will be given the opportunity to reform and redeem
themselves by deeds, and depending on these deeds, will be entitled to
lighter sentences or be absolved of past offenses . " but the offer of
amnesty applies only to viet cong sympathizers and not to hard-core
communist cadres, who, diem feels, are incapable of rehabilitation .
diem's announcement came on the first anniversary of the start of his
government's strategic hamlet program, under which 59 per cent of the
south vietnamese people have been brought into villages surrounded by
moats and bamboo fences . as if in celebration of the event, government
forces beat back a violent viet cong attack against a network of
villages around the city of quangngai, some 250 miles northeast of
saigon, where the government set up a successful fortified village
complex in an area that the reds had previously controlled . departing
from the usual communist hit-and-run tactics, a battalion of reds
attacked the hamlets under cover of darkness, drove to the edge of the
u.s . military compound in the city with a grenade assault before being
driven back . " it took two days for the government forces to stamp out
the fire, " said one u.s . official . " after that, they managed to
gain the initiative, and that's what they're keeping . /
