italy fanfani's test along the grand canal in venice, a huge,
brightly lit red-and-white shield of the christian democratic party
gleams in the night ; sprouting from rome's janiculum hill,
overlooking the vatican, is the red-white-green flame of the tiny,
powerless fascists . from messina to milan last week, wide piazzas and
narrow alleyways sprouted in riotous campaign colors, and echoed with
the loudspeaker slogans of scudding little fiat 600s, as italy's
34,300,000 voters prepared to go to the polls for the first national
election in five years . the election is the most important since 1948,
when the communists were defeated in a crucial bid for power . the
threat of a red takeover has long since faded ; this time the main
issue is continuation of the apertura a sinistra (opening to the left),
premier amintore fanfani's year-old experiment in parliamentary
cooperation with the left-wing socialists . mixed blessing . the deal
has given fanfani the necessary majority to introduce a long list of
economic and social reforms ; it also provides the opportunity for
isolating the reds by finally breaking their hold on pietro nenni's
socialists . but the apertura also opens the way to far-reaching
government planning and higher taxes, both of which are strongly
opposed by large and small businessmen ; perhaps significantly,
liberal party leader giovanni malagodi, an economic conservative who
sharply criticizes fanfani's flirtation with the left, has been drawing
large and enthusiastic crowds . another anxiety created by the
center-left coalition is that neutralist nenni will weaken italy's
ties to the atlantic alliance . these fears could cost fanfani's
christian democrats as many as 1,000,000 votes . as always, the vatican
is a hot campaign issue ; this time, pope john has made it hotter than
usual by meeting aleksei adzhubei, nikita khrushchev's son-in-law, last
month, and otherwise establishing friendlier relations with the kremlin
. fortnight ago, the communist newspaper l'unita exaggerated pope
john's recent pacem in terris encyclical as an " an appeal for peace
based on nuclear disarmament . " this prompted a progovernment
newspaper to crack that the reds were suddenly " more papist than the
pope . " in fact, the vatican is quietly backing fanfani's christian
democratic-socialist partnership, though publicly it has steered a
neutral course ; this time, for example, parish priests are not saying
that to vote for the socialists is a grave sin . useful visit . another
john who casts his shadow over the campaign is john f . kennedy . the
u.s . has smoothly shifted its support away from christian democratic
right-wingers who would like to close the apertura, now favors
fanfani's coalition . one group of fanfani supporters is dubbed the "
kennediani, " and the premier, dashing about the countryside in a black
lancia, repeatedly recalls for townsfolk his recent visit to washington
as evidence of italy's high standing with the u.s . for campaign
purposes even fanfani's socialist allies have been warming to the u.s .
asked a socialist speaker, confident of an affirmative answer from a
crowd in bologna's piazza matteotti : " if kennedy were in italy,
would he not support the opening to the left ? " perhaps he would .
more to the point : will the italians ? as the voters head for the
polls this week, prevailing opinion was that they would .
