france encore, non in a 20-minute tv speech last week, charles
de gaulle made his first public address since the historic jan . press
conference at which he barred britain from europe . as the baroque
paragraphs unfolded, it became plain that france's president had not
retreated from the policies that have divided the western alliance and
halted the integration of europe in the three months since . his views
on key issues . . .europe . political integration of europe would "
inevitably end in foreign domination " of the continent . it would, in
any case, be " incompatible with the rights and duties of the french
republic " to surrender sovereignty to a supranational parliament,
which de gaulle disdainfully liked to an " areopagus, " the supreme
court of ancient athens . " in short, it seems to us essential that
europe should be europe and france, france . " . england . with all due
respect to " the great english people, " de gaulle firmly insisted that
/ union " of europe, meaning apparently the gaullist proposal for
closer ties between governments, cannot wait for britain . " one day,
perhaps, " england will be admitted to europe after it has " detached
itself " from its ties with the commonwealth and the u.s . .the western
alliance . the alliance is " indispensable so long as the threats and
ambitions of the soviets continue . " while " conjugating " its defense
with nato, however, france " intends to remain its own master . "
.nuclear independence . france's force de frappe is essential to "
dissuade " wouldbe aggressors and " contribute to the defense of its
allies, including who knows ? america . " for though the americans "
are our good allies, as we are theirs, " in the event of nuclear war
there is " immense and inevitable uncertainty " whether russia and the
u.s . would use nuclear weapons at all, or only in europe, or whether
the two " champions " might not " hurl death reciprocally into each
others' vitals . " critics who say france's deterrent is useless or too
expensive are in " the same category of laggards and scatterbrains who
cried, " no heavy artillery' until 1914, " and before 1939 " cried, "
no armored corps ! no fighter aircraft ! " ' as journalists like to
say, there wasn't very much that was " new " in the speech . but there
weren't any new obstacles either .
