west germany an eclipse of princes when britain's prince
philip and his daughter, princess anne, 12, clambered out of their
raspberry-pink royal plane at frankfurt last week, there were no
tophatted officials to welcome them or respectful crowds cheering " es
lebe hoch .! " after greeting their waiting cousins, prince ludwig
and princess margaret von hessen, philip and anne got quickly into the
rakish alvis sports coupe, which had been flown ahead of the royal
party from london . then they headed down the autobahn to darmstadt,
where they stayed at the von hessens' palatial 18th century schloss
wolfsgarten . the british visitors' four-day stay made little stir in
west germany as a whole, but their presence worked like champagne on
the aristocracy's battered morale . in a society where most bluebloods
feel that they are displaced personages (there hasn't been a kaiser
since 1918), the romantik of a royal visit is rare indeed . thanks to
the nation's miraculous economic boom, west germans today are more
concerned with paychecks than with princely comings and goings . but
the country's economic and social transformation has failed notably to
produce a unified, national fuhrungsschicht (leadership layer) in place
of the old aristocratic ruling caste . the result is a confused and
confusing society in which, says sociologist ralf dahrendorf, there is
not one class of prominenz but " a multitude of competing groups . "
the " pyramids of power " include the church, the military, local
government and such venerable universities as tubingen, gottingen and
heidelberg, where a herr professor commands undiminished respect from
the community at large . salon from ford ? by far the most powerful
and conspicuous elite in present-day germany is, of course, the
geldaristokratie, the new industrial plutocracy whose yellow mercedeses
and chris-craft cruisers have largely replaced the iron cross and the
dueling scar as status symbols . the new upper crust is personified by
such tycoons as rudolf august oetker, who parlayed a baking powder
business into a 100-company empire ; hans gunther sohl, who as boss of
thyssen since war's end has turned a family ironworks into west
germany's biggest steelmaker ; and munich's rudolf munemann, one of
the nation's biggest and boldest financiers . yet, for all its wealth,
says sociologist dahrendorf, the geldaristokratie " is searching above
itself in the social hierarchy for its behavioral standards . but the
space above it is empty . " this, he suggests, accounts for the
joyless, frantic materialism that characterizes much of postwar german
life " the medieval choir stall in the dining room, the conspicuous
consumption, the complete lack of taste in art and literature . "
complains one sophisticated young princess : " if the ford foundation
really wants to do something for germany, it should endow a salon in
bonn . just a little salon . the old society is dead now . " vons in
volkswagens . like the last great auks waddling across the tundra, a
few ancient families still survive in the feudal splendor they enjoyed
when germany was a patchwork of petty principalities . in franconia,
convivial count franz erbach presides over three family castles (one is
kept for hunting parties) ; at dinner, his liveried chief huntsman
stations himself behind the count's chair to summon a footman whenever
his master's wineglass is empty . prince emich zu leiningen, 36, whose
escutcheon is at least 880 years old, is a globe-trotting big-game
hunter who honed his marksmanship as a youth by taking potshots at
family portraits in his handsome baroque palace at amorbach . many old
bavarian families stubbornly resisted the nazis and were singled out
for persecution by hitler ; after the war, they were able to reclaim
their confiscated holdings intact, and ever since have managed to keep
the boar from the door with conspicuous success . one of their
liveliest members is handsome prince " alfie " auersperg, who was down
to his last schloss a few years ago ; today he boasts a priceless
collection of french paintings and a u.s . heiress for a wife . because
the bavarian aristocrats have traditionally been less exclusive than
prussia's patricians, munich today is one city in which the rival
elites come together . munich's jet set, composed of the nouveau riche
and the ancient upper crust, shuttles between st . moritz and egypt's
resort of helwan . its reigning beauty is the statuesque blonde
daughter of banker munemann, " antschi, " who hurtles around town in an
eggshell-colored ferrari ; however, many families with " von " in
their names still prefer to drive volkswagens . " everything, " sighs a
jet-set princess, " is so mixed up these days . /
top ten thousand . scores of
young bluebloods have gone to work and often belie the aristocracy's
traditional reputation for stupidity . the boards of big industrial
companies are liberally studded with noble names . the names are
particularly in demand as public relations men . " i do like snobs, "
exclaims one princely p.r . man . " they are all so kind to one ! "
two of west germany's ablest journalists are titled : countess marion
donhoff, political editor of hamburg's weekly die zeit, and count hans
werner finck von finckenstein, a correspondent for die welt . says one
corporate count : " all you need to get ahead in industry is
reasonably good looks, self-assurance and organizational talent . this
the nobility had, and now the young ones are all fat people in their
firms . " germany's nobility was largely to blame for its own decline .
holding themselves aloof from politics, business and the intellectual
world, die oberen zehntausend (the top ten thousand), as bismarck
called the elite, devoted their lives either to hunting or to the army
; when hindenburg joined the cadet corps in 1859, 2,000 of 2,900
prussian officers were of nobel birth . however, in its emphasis on a "
citizens' army, " west germany's government has even closed off this
time-honored avenue for " aristocratic service . " as far back as 1826,
the year that cannon king friedrich krupp died, goethe bewailed a new "
century of able men, " protesting : " it is riches and speed that the
world admires and strives for . " the first krupp and the other new
tycoons were essential to the kaisers' dreams of empire ; the
aristocratic clans that accepted them won new wealth and a new lease on
life . finally decimated by two world wars, denigrated by hitler's
funktionarsgesellschaft (society of functionaries), their eclipse was
sealed by the postwar partition of germany . worst hit of all were the
wealthy junkers, the brahmins of teutonic society, who lost their vast
tracts of land in the eastern territories and in most cases came to
west germany as penniless refugees . company cousins . even today many
older aristocrats regard a business career as not quite salonfahig
(socially desirable) . at a dinner party in bonn last week, a
bespectacled count drew sympathetic clucks when he declared : " all my
young cousins are in industry now . incredible ! " another aristocrat
harrumphed recently : " the great problem in germany today is that
there are no gentlemen in the government . " it is to west germany's
credit nonetheless that nowadays talents are apt to count for more than
titles . " how do you get ahead today ? " asks a grey-templed
industrialist . " it's easy proficiency and elbows . " this new,
assertive sense of self-confidence has penetrated to every level of
german society . instead of accepting the old class divisions as
preordained, says sociologist helmut schelsky, german workers today
believe almost religiously in the slogan : " ich kann das auch werden
(i can get to be what he is) . " thus, despite the laments of the
aristocracy, argues schelsky, the end of the old order may prove to be
a blessing after all . " if you want democracy, " says he, " you can't
complain about the leveling and atomization of society . i'm pretty
optimistic about the future . /
