great britain aldermaston's amen ? since 1958, when the
campaign for nuclear disarmament staged the first aldermaston march,
its 52-mile easter parade has turned into britain's biggest lunatic
fringe benefit . beardies and weirdies soon stole the spotlight from
the pacifist parsons and left-wing laborites who started the
ban-the-bomb movement . it also became evident that the four-day
shuffle was being manipulated by such highly motivated " pilgrims " as
communist agitators, anarchists, and a few thugs to boot . last week,
after the sixth annual spectacular ended in blisters and bombast in
hyde park, most responsible britons including several c.n.d .
co-founders were more eager to ban the march than the bomb . their
disillusionment was the result of a stratagem that struck even the
tolerant british as a disloyal act . even before the marchers left
aldermaston, there appeared copies of a crudely mimeographed,
twelvepage document headed : danger ! official secret . inside, its
anonymous authors declared : " we are spies for peace . we have
decided to publish an official secret . there are thousands more
secrets in captivity . this is not the only one we shall release . "
the information it contained was, in fact, highly classified : the
locations, code names and telephone numbers of twelve regional seats of
government from which british authorities would attempt to restore
order in the event of nuclear attack . " this, " exclaimed home
secretary henry brooke, " is the work of a traitor . " by no
coincidence, the only emergency headquarters described in detail was
r.s.g . 6, an underground bunker in the berkshire woods along the
marchers' route from reading to london . ignoring c.n.d . officials'
pleas to stay on the main road, 1,000 of some 15,000 marchers left the
procession and poured down the country lane marked on the " peace "
spies' map . after a scuffle with police, the shouting demonstrators
staged a mass squat around the bunker for more than an hour, until one
of their leaders announced : " we have achieved our object . "
whatever their real object, the " spies for peace " triggered a
full-scale scotland yard investigation and brought prime minister
harold macmillan scurrying back from his country home to london for
consultation with his cabinet . nevertheless, canon john collins, c.n.d
. chairman and preceptor of st . paul's cathedral, simpered on tv that
most marchers " treated it rather as a joke . " his merriment was not
shared by james cameron, a crusading journalist who has been a
prominent figure in c.n.d . since its inception . cameron conceded
sadly that the ban-the-bomb marches had become a vehicle for too many
secondary and dubious intentions . " admitting belatedly that c.n.d .
had been taken for a ride, cameron cried : " god save us from our
friends .
