spain trouble this summer ? one day last week, three
impatient shrieks of a locomotive whistle shattered the morning calm of
sanlucar de barrameda, a small spanish city in the grape country around
cadiz . on the dusty railroad platform, the stationmaster nervously
paced back and forth waiting for the expected passengers, seasonal
workers who commute to their jobs in the vineyards . but scarcely a
soul showed up at the station, for in sanlucar and nearby jerez de la
frontera 3,900 workers were out on strike for a $2.50 daily wage (a 50
#$ boost), portal-to-portal pay between the vineyard and home, and two
not one daily cigars, the slang word for the workers' traditional
20-minute siesta . the strike was the latest and biggest in a wave of
labor unrest that has swept dictator francisco franco's spain this
spring . in barcelona the hispano suiza airplane-engine plant recently
laid off 150 employees following a series of work slowdowns, was forced
to hire them back when 2,000 olivetti factory employees threatened a
sympathy walkout . two sitdown strikes in a single week disrupted work
in a seville textile plant . six hundred madrid metalworkers have been
threatening similar trouble after stubbornly refusing to sign a new
contract . aid from the priests . the complaints are many, for the
spanish worker puts in longer hours for less pay than almost any other
worker in western europe, and strikes are legally banned . when el
caudillo granted substantial wage boosts for the 60,000 striking
asturias coal miners last summer, he merely whetted the appetites of
workers in the rest of the country ; another increase last jan . 1,
raising unskilled laborers from a minimum 60 #$ to $1 per day, did not
help the millions of skilled workers above this meager floor . openly
backing the latest wave of strikes are the priests of the workers'
brotherhoods of catholic action and several small but effective
catholic lay organizations that regularly blast the caudillo's tight
controls on workers from beneath the sheltering wing of the church .
one such group, the young christian workers, publishes an uncensored
and outspoken monthly bulletin, juventud obrera, that demands free,
western-style labor unions, lashes out at the anachronistic sindicatos,
which fix prices and wages throughout the country . said journal editor
francisco guerrero, 25, describing his mission last week : " our work
is god's answer to the evil negation of all human values . it is the
only salvation for spain's masses, oppressed from above (by franco) and
menaced from below (by the communists) . " a trip to cadiz . such frank
talk has the regime seriously worried, and a few of the more
progressive members of franco's authoritarian regime are anxiously
trying to improve labor conditions . the labor ministry is preparing a
bill to legalize " labor " strikes (as distinct from " political "
strikes) . another measure of the regime's concern was the swift
settlement of last week's trouble among the vineyard workers of
sanlucar and jerez . as soon as word of the work stoppage was flashed
to madrid, a labor ministry official raced to cadiz and pressured
vineyard employers into bowing to most of the worker demands, including
more centimos as well as the second cigar . trouble was over for the
moment . but worried franco aides know that dozens of important wage
contracts in many industries are up for renewal during the coming weeks
. unless pay boosts are granted promptly, spain is almost certainly in
for a serious nation-wide wave of strikes this summer .
