death at dawn julian grimau garcia was 25 and a detective in
madrid when the spanish civil war broke out in 1936 . but he was also a
member of the spanish communist party, and his professional police
training soon landed him a key job in the red apparatus . he became
chief of " criminal investigations " for madrid, valencia and
barcelona, ferreting out supporters of francisco franco . part of
grimau's job was to serve on kangaroo courts, called chekas (after the
onetime initials of the soviet secret police), which ordered dozens of
summary death sentences during the brutal three-year war . after the
republican collapse grimau fled, worked as a communist agent in
czechoslovakia, russia, mexico and cuba . a member of the central
committee of the outlawed spanish communist party, he was living in
france when he slipped across the frontier in 1959 to reorganize the
spanish communist underground . after several trips in and out of spain
since 1959, an informer gave him away to police in madrid last november
. franco's cops clapped him in jail and began a lengthy interrogation .
during one session, grimau leaped, fell, or was pushed from a
first-floor window, fracturing his skull and both arms . last week,
with a large dent in his forehead, gaunt, balding grimau heard a
seven-man military court tick off the charges against him ; they
ranged from " continuing military rebellion " to arson, torture and
execution of anti-republicans by the chekas 25 years ago . the maximum
penalty was death . did he care to say something before sentence was
passed only this, " replied grimau . " since 1936, i have lived the
life of a communist . i will die a communist . " then he took his seat
and listened intently as the court pronounced the sentence everyone
expected death . this was the cue for communist demonstrations in half
a dozen west european cities ; nikita khrushchev, no stranger to
executions, had the gall to send a personal appeal for clemency to
franco . grimau's wife vainly urged president kennedy to intervene .
the international pressure only stiffened the regime's determination to
carry out the penalty . at a meeting with his cabinet, franco upheld
the sentence . next day at dawn, grimau, pale but composed, was led
into the courtyard of carabanchel prison just outside madrid . he
walked alone to the wall, refused a blindfold, shouted " viva el
communismo " , and then collapsed under a volley of shots fired by
spanish moroccan troops .
