ghana dealing with enemies during his six years as ghana's boss,
president kwame nkrumah has dealt with his opposition in a variety of
ways intimidation, jail, exile . last week he went a step further . in
a packed courtroom in accra, where mine detectors were used to check
spectators for weapons, an nkrumah-created tribunal passed out death
sentences to five enemies of the regime . the five men, four ghanaians
and a nigerian, were charged with treason in connection with half a
dozen explosions that killed 35 persons and injured 300 . the bombing
began last august, when the blast of a hand grenade wounded osagyefo in
the shoulder as he drove by in his russian-made chaika limousine near
the northern border village of kulungugu . nkrumah's cops have been
rounding up suspects ever since . as the five-week trial dragged on,
one of the defendants, nigerian immigrant malam mama tula, 44,
testified that the real brains behind the kulungugu attempt were three
men who had been nkrumah's closest cronies, ex-foreign minister ako
adjei, ex-information minister tawia adamafio, and h . h .
cofie-crabbe, former executive secretary of nkrumah's own convention
people's party . mama tula said that the trio conferred with the bomb
throwers at a village hideout, supplied eight british-made grenades and
promised a $560 bounty if nkrumah was killed . the three have been in
prison under the preventive detention act since last august . one of
the four other treason defendants beside mama tula in the dock, teiko
tagoe, 20, readily admitted to possession of a live hand grenade at a
meeting of nkrumah's party last january . another, joseph quaye mensah,
57, owned up to mailing the redeemer an anonymous letter warning, "
dear dr., this is to inform you i am still chasing you until i . . .
have you killed, " but pleaded that he was only trying to scare nkrumah
. when the testimony ended, the three wihite-wigged judges filed out,
spent another two weeks preparing a 6,000-word decision they returned
last week, the chief justice paused somberly to don a black cap before
pronouncing sentence, signal that the verdict would be death by hanging
