southeast asia a losing proposition the west's maneuvers to
counter the disintegration in laos last week were largely diplomatic .
in london, british foreign secretary lord home called on russia
co-administrator with britain of the geneva accords to sign a joint
appeal that the feuding forces in laos end their fighting . fearful
that such peace talk would nudge asian communist revolutionaries still
closer to rival red china and its " hard line, " russia refused, unless
the statement specifically blamed the u.s . for undermining the peace
in laos . britain vetoed the suggestion . president kennedy hustled
under secretary of state for political affairs averell harriman, who
had hammered out the basic format for the geneva agreement last summer,
to moscow to urge on khrushchev the need for russian intercession in
laos . " we regard the maintenance of the geneva accords as essential
to the security of laos itself, " said kennedy, " and as a test of
whether it is possible for an accord to be reached between countries
which have serious differences . " in moscow, harriman was received
coolly ; only a junior protocol officer was at the airport to meet him
. when he got to the kremlin, he found khrushchev more than happy to
give vague endorsement of the geneva accords, but less than willing to
take any concrete action to stop the fighting in the plain of jars.
the road builders . as the diplomats talked, the pentagon was quietly
flexing its muscles . units of the u.s . seventh fleet began cruising
in the south china sea, and though the move had been planned for
months, washington picked last week to announce that two combat-ready
battle groups would soon move into thailand to take part in next
month's full-scale seato battle maneuvers . it was reminiscent of the
crash buildup of troop strength in thailand just a year ago, when the
last serious flare-up in laos took place . left behind when these
troops were withdrawn were enough trucks, tanks and personnel carriers
to equip a third battle group that might be needed in the event of
emergency . the
plain is named for the scores of large, stone burial urns dotting the
area, in which the ancestral ashes of the laotian people were once
deposited . both the pathet lao and the neutralists avoid fighting near
the jars, for laotian tradition holds that the penalty for disturbing
them is a violent and fiery retribution from the spirits within .
apart from the combat troops, some 2,600
other u.s . military personnel chiefly engineers and signal troops are
in thailand . near the laotian border, a u.s . army construction
battalion is nearing completion of an allweather jet airstrip . at a
meeting with top u.s . aides in bangkok, admiral harry d . felt,
commander of all u.s . forces in the pacific, discussed contingency
plans in the event that the pathet lao moves off the plain of jars into
the mekong river valley . the u.s . is not committed to put troops
into laos,
and the military is not enthusiastic about the prospect of fighting
there, for the lack of airfields, railroads and good roads would make
it tough to sustain operations . but if the pathet lao showed an
inclination to sweep all the way south, the u.s . forces in thailand
might well have to move across the mekong and occupy the laotian
capital of vientiane and other strategic points in the valley .
meanwhile in laos itself, a lull had settled over the battlefield . in
a flying visit to the plain of jars, neutralist premier souvanna phouma
managed to arrange a shaky cease-fire between the pathet lao and kong
le's neutralists . though sporadic artillery duels still pockmarked the
plain, there were no outright red attacks, and the neutralists lost no
new territory . but hostilities threatened to erupt from another
quarter . around the perimeter of the plain, right-wing general phoumi
nosavan was reinforcing his positions, and in the foothills behind the
pathet lao lines, tough, well-armed meo tribesmen, who have no love for
the reds, posed a dangerous threat to communist supply routes from
north viet nam . if laos should fall to the reds, north viet nam's ho
chi minh trail (see map), the supply route which
cuts through the laotian thickets to communist viet cong guerrillas in
south viet nam, would open up, permitting the reds to pour arms and men
into that embattled land . control of laos' mekong river valley would
also give the communists a highway for subversion of neighboring
cambodia and thailand, which in turn would increase red pressure on
burma and malaya . fait accompli . for the moment, the reds appeared
content to consolidate their new territorial gains on the plain of jars
and to let the crisis cool of its own accord . if they moved off the
plain, they would surely march right into a civil war with phoumi's
rightist forces, thus inviting u.s . intervention, which they wished to
avoid at all costs . despite protests by both souvanna and the u.s.,
the pathet lao's territorial grab was a fait accompli . there were
those in the u.s . who thought the only long-range answer to the laos
problem was outright partition . already a de facto partition of laos
existed : the northern part of the country was firmly controlled by
the communists, and the rice-rich mekong river valley was in the hands
of the rightists . it was not the ideal solution for laos . but, as one
u.s . official said " there are no good solutions in laos . there
never will be . laos has always been a losing proposition . /
