on the other hand nikita khrushchev's speech started off like just
one more of his exhaustive exhortations for harder work by party bosses
and factory hands . but by the time he was through, three hours later,
his rambling remarks in the kremlin's palace of the congresses had
touched off a fresh torrent of speculation about the future leadership
of the soviet union . and all because of a few vague sentences about
old age . mused the kremlin commissar : " here am i, a man of the
older generation . . . i am already 69, and everyone knows that i cannot
hold forever the positions i now hold in the party and the state . "
crystal balls . what on earth did khrushchev mean ? was he about to
resign as premier of the nation, first secretary of the communist
party, or both ? had he lost out in a back-room power struggle ? or
was he merely trying to smooth the way for a possible successor ? if
the public was baffled, so were the free world's kremlinologists, that
tight little band of experts who spend half their time reading between
pravda's lines and half peering into their crystal balls . for weeks,
the experts had been ferverishly speculating over khrushchev's possible
heir . the favorite was handsome, hard-boiled frol kozlov, 54, no . 2
man in the party, whom nikita had quietly singled out as his choice
almost four years ago (time cover, july 13, 1959) . but other experts
excitedly pointed out that kozlov was the only kremlin leader absent
from a major moscow blowout last week marking the 93rd anniversary of
lenin's birth, thus concluded that kozlov might be on the skids . on
the basis of such barely visible clues, weary kremlinologists stake
their reputations . one of the best of the bunch, britain's edward
crankshaw, inspired one theory of nikita's future with a frontpage
story in london's observer declaring that aging khrushchev might
announce his retirement " within two years " at the coming may 28
meeting of the communist party central committee . who told him ? "
well-informed soviet sources, " of course . all guesswork . it is not
easy to say who should be believed . from jeremy wolfenden, london
daily telegraph correspondent in moscow, came word that " russian
sources decisively reject the idea that mr . khrushchev will retire
either from the premiership or the secretaryship of the party . " merle
fainsod, director of harvard's russian research center, said crankshaw
/ is spinning things out rather thin . " william griffith, research
associate on communist affairs at m.i.t.'s center for international
studies, declared, " i would not say that the weight of evidence is on
crankshaw's side . " but just in case it was, griffith added : " you
can argue either way ; either khrushchev is in trouble, or he's so
secure in power that he can perfectly well afford to mention retiring .
/ one daring demonologist even suggested that nikita himself gaily was
spreading the rumors in order to rally more support . on the other
hand, wolfgang leonhard, the ex-communist who now analyzes red affairs
for west germany's die zeit, thought it was " very possible that
khrushchev will give up one of his posts, more likely the government
job . " the free-for-all was clearly getting out of hand ; somewhat
unprofessionally the guardian's polish-born soviet expert, victor
zorza, shrugged, " it's all guesswork, " then plunged back into the
fray .
