italy between left & right fifteen months ago, when italian
premier amintore fanfani marched his moderate christian democratic
party through the apertura a sinistra (opening to the left) into a
parliamentary partnership with the left-wing socialists, he
acknowledged the deal as a dangerous gamble . " we shall certainly have
some sleepless nights, " he said . by now, fanfani must be a hopeless
insomniac . last week nearly 33 million italians went to the polls for
national elections and rewarded their experimenting premier with a
jolting setback that cost his party 730,000 votes and may well cost him
his job . the apertura might survive, but its future like fanfani's
would be riskier than ever . ashen-faced, the pintsize (5 ft . 1 in.)
premier faced reporters in the chigi palace on election night with
uncommon shock . " the christian democrats, " he declared, " have been
declared as the relative majority party, even if by a narrower margin
than before . and now to bed . " papal pal . to bed indeed . fanfani
already had news of the massive gains of palmiro togliatti's
communists, who improved their position as the country's second largest
party (after the christian democrats), won 25 per cent of the entire
nation's votes, and 26 new seats in the chamber of deputies . the reds
now hold a total of 166 of the chamber's 630 places, compared with the
christian democrats' 260 . under the shrewd leadership of aging (70)
communist boss palmiro togliatti, the reds have always taken care to
balance their ideology against the fact that italy is a catholic nation
. at one time they backed the monarchy ; nowadays they even favor the
capitalist common market . as a nation, italy is less than a century
old ; first under the monarchy, then through the long night of
fascism, the country has had little time to accustom itself to
democracy . thus, to many italians, communism or at least their brand
of it does not appear the fearful specter that it does in many other
lands . in part, the communist showing was due to red defections from
pietro nenni's sharply divided socialists, the leftwing crowd that had
thrown its lot with fanfani . and in part it was due to pope john
xxiii, who had given a modicum of approval to the far left with his
pacem in terris encyclical, and with his warm welcome to the vatican
last march for nikita khrushchev's visiting son-in-law, aleksei
adzhubei . new low . from the right, apertura's chief challenge was
among the free-enterprising liberals, who more than doubled their
previous vote of 1,000,000 ; this was a spectacular gain, even if it
amounted to only 7 per cent of the total turnout . most of the credit
went to tireless liberal campaigner giovanni malagodi, 58, a banker
turned politician, who hit out hard at fanfani's schemes for more
government planning and higher taxes . it was fanfani's own christian
democrats who took the worst drubbing of all . the party had no trouble
remaining in first place with 11.7 million ballots, but on a percentage
basis it sank to the lowest share of the total vote (about 38 per cent
) since world war ii . summed up rome's il messaggero : internal
dissension and " incessant clamor had the effect of driving away voters
. the party lost the frightened, the confused and the indecisive . " il
messaggero's advice to stop squabbling went unheeded . last week
right-wing christian democrats, who opposed the apertura in the first
place, seized the election results as a signal to demand that fanfani
step aside as premier in the new government probably to be formed this
month .
