yugoslavia talking to tito on his way home after a 16,000-mile
swing through ankara, teheran, karachi and new delhi, u.s . secretary
of state dean rusk squeezed in a short stop in belgrade . for the
diplomatic record, rusk officially was repaying a 1961 visit to
washington by yugoslav foreign minister koca popovic . but there was
more to rusk's courtesy call than that . u.s.-yugoslav relations were
never really warm ; since the u.s . congress last summer served notice
that it would eliminate belgrade's " most favored nation " trading
clause this year, they have been positively chilly . marshal tito's
ostentatiously friendly trip to moscow last year did not improve
matters, either . but belgrade was anxious to assure the u.s . that it
was officially still " unaligned, " and to smooth things over, rusk
agreed at the last minute to make his visit . popovic was out at modern
sucrin airport to greet rusk when the big u.s . jet touched down . also
on hand was a red carpet and a military band . but that was the end of
the fanfare . since the yugoslavs do not unfurl foreign flags along the
new autoput that leads from the airport to the city except for a
visiting chief of state, rusk's route was lined with blueand-white
finnish banners in place for president urho k . kekkonen's arrival next
day . there were no crowds at all, since the yugoslavs did not bother
to announce rusk's trip in advance . after lunch with popovic and a
reception at the u.s . embassy given by retiring u.s . ambassador
george kennan, rusk paid a call on tito in his belgrade villa .
yugoslavia has some 1956 vintage u.s . military equipment for which
tito would like spare parts ; since 50 per cent of yugoslavia's
commerce is with the west, it is worried about the rising tariff walls
of the six-nation common market . naturally, tito raised the problem of
/ most favored " nation status which, if eliminated, could sharply
boost import levies on yugoslavia's $30 million annual trade with the
u.s . rusk could offer no assurances that the clause would be restored,
since the decision is up to congress . on the whole, it was a pleasant
if inconclusive chat . then, less than 24 hours after he arrived, the
secretary of state, his wife, and 28 aides who had accompanied him on
the five-nation trip, packed up and headed for washington .
