france liberte, egalite mais verite ? " every frenchman, " by
ancient axiom, " is willing to die for his country ; but none is
willing to pay for it . " so passionately do the french pursue their
democratic ideal of representation without taxation that cheating le
fisc, as they call the income tax bureau, has become the most pervasive
and engrossing national passtime after love-making and a far less risky
one . as a result of the centuries-old duel between chronically
strapped governments and perennially poor-mouthed citizens, france in
theory imposes higher income taxes than almost any other western
country, and in practice collects less : a mere 14 per cent of
government revenue v . 60 per cent in the u.s . " everybody is a
conspirator, " lamented premier (and onetime banker) georges pompidou
as his government launched a fact-finding program called operation
verite (operation truth), whose main aim is to get frenchmen to do what
comes unnaturally to report their earnings . why, cried the premier, "
it is nearly impossible to know even what a government employee earns
! " in 1961, the government estimates, at least 36 million of
france's 46 million people paid not a single sou of income tax ; by
the most conservative reckoning, 50 per cent of those who should pay
taxes got off scot-free . even more remarkable, in the midst of
unparalleled upper-crust opulence, was that in all france only 1,014
citizens barely enough to support one of paris' #$ #$ #$ restaurants
admitted to earning more than $12,800 a year . fiscal camouflage . the
injustice of the system is that hapless wage earners, whose incomes are
recorded on company payrolls and are thus easily available to le fisc,
shell out two-thirds of all the income taxes collected in france .
while the rich get richer, thanks to an economic boom and the native
genius for fiscal camouflage, rich and poor alike most shoulder massive
consumer taxes, such as the 74 per cent levy that makes french gasoline
(90 #$ a gallon) europe's most expensive . tax reform has seldom seemed
more imperative, for the government needs urgently to be assured of
ever-rising revenues for such huge undertakings as its force de frappe,
including an extravagant three-year buildup for france's first hbomb
tests in the pacific, announced last week . at the same time, the
economy is threatened by a burst of inflation that has boosted incomes
and prices 11 per cent in the past year and threatens to get out of
hand in the wake of the recent, successful miners' strike for higher
pay . poodles & picassos . to put teeth in its tax-extraction campaign,
the government has unleashed a horde of expert snoopers who descend
unexpectedly on companies and can spot a padded payroll as unerringly
as a michelin inspector exposing a warmed-over sauce bearnaise . but
experience proves that it will take far more ruthless measures to make
individual frenchmen divulge their true earnings . in 1947, when robert
schuman was finance minister, the government did its best by
introducing the theory of " external signs of wealth, " a wondrously
complex latin formula whereby tax inspectors gauged a man's richesse by
counting and grading his servants, cars, yachts, dogs (purebred or
mongrel ? ) and declarable mistresses . as a result, wealthy
parisians let the paint peel from their houses, put their picassos in
the attic, and claimed that their pedigreed poodles were used
exclusively as watchdogs, which are taxexempt . (le fisc finally
abandoned its hit-and-mistress methods this year.) when the inspectors
started demanding taxpayers' financial records, artful frenchmen from
plumbers to landlords retaliated by insisting on cash for their
services ; the most fashionable doctor in paris today would sooner
vote for socialized medicine than accept a patient's check . the
government's biggest problem is that honesty, as french taxpayers see
it, is not merely irrelevant but almost certainly disastrous as well .
a high-minded young parisian artist once filed a scrupulously accurate
tax return and was horrfied to find that the skeptical local inspector,
applying the standard correction factor, credited him with three times
the income he reported . this week the government presented an
ambitious program of social and economic reform to the national
assembly, and the perennial question of how to pay for it once again
came to the fore . of course, de gaulle could always imitate the
anglo-saxons and send tax evaders to jail . but then how would he raise
the revenue to build all those new prisons ?
