middle east shifting fortunes in a letter to the moslem wise
men of egypt's 1,000-year-old al azhar university, a distraught iraqi
electrician wrote : " i vowed to sacrifice my son for arab unity . now
that it has been achieved, should i carry out my vow and kill my boy .
an al azhar scholar replied that he was moved by the writer's faith,
but warned that moslem law forbids human sacrifices . therefore, " your
vow carries no obligation and should not be executed . " lowered flags
. there was a more material reason for the electrician to abstain from
filial murder : arab unity has been loudly trumpeted by egypt, syria
and iraq, but it has hardly been consummated . on the surface,
everything seemed to be proceeding according to plan . syria and iraq
lowered their national flags and raised instead the official three-star
banner of gamal abdel nasser's united arab republic . ministers raced
from capital to capital discussing plans for merging foreign services,
school systems, airlines and textbooks . military delegations brooded
over the vital amalgamation of the three armed forces . jurists were
hard at work on a draft of a new federal constitution to be jointly
voted on next september . neighboring jordan seethed with an unrest
that might dethrone king hussein and force the nation to join an arab
union . cairo's press headlined that hussein was challenged by his army
. syria and iraq papers reported " spreading revolution " and "
guerrilla war with pitched battles . " in damascus a band of jordanian
exiles, led by handsome, hotheaded ex-colonel ali abu nuwar, 40, set up
a rival " government . " abu nuwar had nearly toppled hussein in 1957,
but because of old friendship, the king spared abu nuwar's life and
banished him . ever since, abu nuwar has repaid the act of mercy by
promoting anti-hussein conspiracies . people's noose . as the pressures
mounted, radio baghdad called hussein the " hireling king " and the "
grandson of uncle sam, " warned that flight was the only escape from "
the noose the people are preparing for you . " instead of decamping,
king hussein last week closed his border against syrian arms and
agents, toured the old city of jerusalem, al birah and ramallah, where
he chatted with army officers and inspected troops in their sandbag
dugouts facing the israeli positions along the frontier . in his
determination to stay in power, hussein jeered at israel, partly to
pacify the palestinian arabs, who make up two-thirds of his 1,800,000
subjects, partly because israel's support for jordan independence is a
political embarrassment . the problem threatened to involve the
u.s . washington had given hussein assurances of support . with next
year's
u.s . election campaign to think about, president kennedy had to
concern himself with israel as well . in washington, new york's
republican senator jacob javits led a band of colleagues in calling for
a sharp change in the u.s . policy of " dealing evenhandedly' with
friend and foe alike in the middle east, " and attacked continued
financial aid to nasser . not an inch . at week's end, however, jordan
was still intact, and it was the arab unity movement that was reeling .
it had to do with a cabinet crisis in syria between the majority
belonging to the baath socialist party and the minority of strongly
nasserite ministers . the struggle had been brewing for two months, and
pro-nasser ministers frankly told newsmen that they intended to
overthrow the baathists . the baath counter-strategy, as enunciated by
its founder, michel aflak, was : " do everything to preserve unity,
but don't give an inch, and don't surrender any power . " when rumors
of a pro-nasser army coup last week swept the volatile syrian capital
of damascus, baath acted . more than 100 army officers were dismissed
or clapped in jail . in retaliation, all six nasserite ministers handed
in their resignations . deputy premier nihad elkassem, who had led a
syrian unity delegation to cairo last march and had sobbed with joy on
nasser's shoulder, cried, " we are giving up our responsibilities
because we have not been given the means to carry them out . " the
cabinet walkout was intended to bring the baathists to heel, and it
well might . isolated in power, with the street mobs sympathetic to
nasser and the army of uncertain loyalty, baath's only available allies
are the merchants and landowners, who most oppose nasser's social
objectives . their embrace could be as fatal to baath as israel's would
be to hussein . during the crisis, nasser was off on a good-will visit
to algeria, but, for once, egypt's press and vituperative radio showed
surprising self-control neither mentioned the syrian struggle or the
nasserite resignations . at week's end, cairo's military leaders
abruptly canceled a scheduled meeting to plan the merger of arab armies.
