europe deadlock or deathblow ? as 1963 dawned, it
promised to be the west's year of destiny . its great hope was the
common market, whose historic march toward the economic and political
integration of western europe seemed as irresistible as it was
irreproachable . it appeared almost inevitable that britain would be
admitted to the common market and be followed rapidly by its outer
seven trading partners, forming a new continental community as rich and
populous as the u.s . then, armed with broad tariff-cutting powers
under president kennedy's trade expansion act, the u.s . was prepared
to negotiate with europe the biggest, boldest liberalization of trade
in western history . from economic partnership, many statesmen
believed, would come the political framework of an atlantic community .
tired of concessions . how far this grand design has receded from
reality is only now becoming fully apparent . the disintegration
started last january, when, as all the world knows, charles de gaulle
vetoed britain's admission to the common market . but while other
members of the six were varyingly irritated by de gaulle's way of
saying non and disappointed by britain's exclusion, few at the time
could have predicted the depth and duration of distrust that de gaulle
has stirred in europe . among the six, who have been deadlocked on all
major issues ever since, there is increasingly widespread apprehension
that france's adamantly self-centered policies may have dealt the
deathblow to the european community that was envisaged by its founders
. in brussels last week, at an angry meeting of common market foreign
ministers, west germany's foreign minister gerhard schroder declared
flatly that his government is tired of making economic concessions to
suit the french, while germany's dominant interests are imperiled by de
gaulle's foreign policy germany, which relies heavily on foreign trade,
is deeply concerned by the common market's isolation from the rest of
europe, and for strategic reasons is increasingly uneasy at france's
alienation of the u.s . the six, urged schroder, must " take a positive
attitude " to the " kennedy round " of tariff negotiations, " even if
it means a slowdown in our internal development . " france's foreign
minister maurice couve de murville, whose government is afraid of u.s .
competition in europe, repeatedly muttered " absurd " as schroder and
other foreign ministers pressed their case . however, schroder had a
potent weapon . france, europe's lowest-cost agricultural producer, is
demanding that the six adopt a uniform policy on farm prices by july .
since germany would be forced to find new work for at least a million
of its high-cost farmers if this happens, schroder warned that his
government would frustrate any attempt to adopt a common agricultural
policy unless france in return agrees to seek the broad reciprocal
tariff cuts that the other common market nations hope to achieve in
negotiations with the u.s . sixes & sevens . the most explosive issue
was a demand by a majority of common market nations that the community
form a permanent committee to maintain consultation with britain .
after insisting that the palais des congres caucus room be cleared of
advisers including several ambassadors couve de murville said furiously
that britain had been trying to undermine the common market ever since
de gaulle's veto . said he : " france cannot possibly accept this
british behavior . " but the shock waves have spread far beyond the
common market . britain, which only four months ago had such faith in
europe that it was ready to sunder its ties with the commonwealth and
with the european free trade association, had to swallow its pride in
lisbon last week and make a desperate effort even to keep efta together
at its first top-level meeting since february . the reason is that
britain's government has accepted the fact that it will probably not
enter europe during de gaulle's lifetime and, if the common market
should stagnate, may never join . france's design for a narrow,
protectionist, third-force europe has had its most traumatic effect on
washington, which ever since world war ii has taken for granted that
the u.s . and europe have common ideals and interests . last week, on
the eve of a ministerial conference to discuss the scope and approach
of the kennedy round of tariff cuts, it was already plain that france
is again determined to seek its own narrow self-interest, without
regard for its common market partners and with every intention of
blocking u.s . hopes of expanding trade with the new europe . indeed,
as long as the inner six are splintered and the seven remain outer,
there will be no new europe .
