russia two on trial neither of the men who glared at each other
across the prisoner's dock in a crowded moscow courtroom looked very
much like a spy . dapper greville maynard wynne, 44, was a salesman who
lived quietly in london's fashionable chelsea section with his wife and
young son when he was not on the road selling electrical machinery in
russia and eastern europe . slender oleg penkovsky, 44, was a
muchdecorated russian war hero who recently had held the delicate job
of arranging east-west scientific exchanges for a soviet state
committee . but last week the incongruous pair went on trial for
espionage before a military panel of three soviet supreme court
generals . while klieg lights glared and some 300 perspiring spectators
sat on the edge of their seats for five days, the most bizarre spy
circus in postwar soviet history unfolded before their eyes . if the
two men's confessions could be believed, the west had pulled off a
spectacular coup in the cold war struggle for intelligence secrets .
for 18 straight months, from april 1961 until last october, penkovsky
had funneled to wynne and other couriers a stream of nearly 5,000
photographs of secret soviet data on missile developments, troop
movements, economic and political inside stuff from the communist party
central committee itself . just a chauffeur . it began in november
1960, when penkovsky got fed up with his moscow job . seeking " the
easy life, " penkovsky said he sent a letter to the u.s . embassy in
moscow, offering his services to the u.s . according to penkovsky,
officials in washington ignored the offer, fearing a trap . but
penkovsky was determined to work for the west . his chance came at last
when he struck up a conversation with wynne the following month at a
moscow reception for visiting british technicians . wynne was happy to
meet the russian, he said, because soviet contacts were useful for his
machinery business . thus, when penkovsky showed up next april in
london, supposedly to set up an exchange with british scientists, wynne
went out to the airport to meet him and show him around town . were you
merely a chauffeur ? asked the prosecutor . that's it, wynne replied
. exploded penkovsky to the court : " this is a child's tale . believe
me, citizen judges, i cannot understand why wynne tries to minimize his
role . i didn't need a chauffeur . i could have taken a taxi . " truth
was, said penkovsky, he was already relaying film to british
intelligence, and now was in touch with the americans as well . in
london he delivered two bulky packages of state secrets to wynne, tried
on british and u.s . colonels' uniforms just in case he decided to
defect, even discussed a possible escape from russia by submarine if
things got hot . he recalled more relaxed moments pub-crawling and
nightclubbing . box of chocolates . after london, there was paris .
wynne gaily showed the russian around fontainebleau, versailles, the
lido and the moulin rouge and willingly picked up the tab . penkovsky
handed over 15 more rolls of film and had five sessions with western
intelligence agents . on occasions when wynne came to moscow on a
business trip, penkovsky usually passed his information to him
concealed in a box of chocolates, which wynne allegedly gave to mrs .
janet chisholm, wife of a second secretary of the british embassy, for
relay to london . when mrs . chisholm suspected she was being followed,
she suggested that wynne give the " chocolates " to her children . on
his flights out of moscow, wynne carried book-size packages of secrets
wrapped in plain brown paper . penkovsky said that when he did not have
wynne around to act as courier, he used his code name, " young, " and
dealt directly with u.s . and british embassy employees through an
elaborate set of signals and telephone codes . it all worked fine until
last fall when the soviet police swooped down on penkovsky, extracting
the confession that implicated wynne . a few days later, russia's
agents located wynne in budapest and hustled him back to moscow .
learning from experience . through it all, wynne doggedly maintained
that he was only a businessman who had been snared in the coils of
british intelligence . at first, he said, he had no idea what the brown
packages or boxes of chocolate really contained . after it dawned on
him that he was a spy, he demanded no part of the " dirty business, "
but his superiors threatened to wreck his commercial affairs, and so he
kept at it . " my answers might seem naive to you professional
gentlemen here, " he said, to the laughter of the courtroom, " but i
had no idea how intelligence operated, i now know even before the
prosecutor finished his summation at the end of the trial, the
government newspaper izvestia appeared in the courtroom reporting his
demand for punishment : a death sentence for penkovsky and ten years
in jail for wynne . the military tribunal retired to confer, then
passed judgment . penkovsky would be shot ; wynne would do eight years
in jail .
