1 berlin 2-12 two inches to safety since the hated wall went up in
1961, escapees have ingeniously gotten past it by tunneling, climbing,
jumping, or by just knocking it down . last week a young austrian
outdid them all, smuggling out his pretty fiancee and her mother
through the simple expedient of keeping his head down . heinz meixner,
20, had moved to west berlin two years ago to take a job as a lathe
worker . as a foreigner, he was able to cross the line freely into east
berlin, where, at a students' dance last september, he fell in love
with tiny, attractive margarete thurau . when margarete applied for
permission to emigrate to austria, communist police told her that she
should marry her young man in east berlin and settle down there . this
was more than meixner could bear . " as soon as i heard that, " says
meixner, " i made up my mind to get her out . " last exit . he laid his
plans with meticulous care . to get a good look at the communist side
of the friedrichstrasse crossing point for foreigners, meixner stalled
his motor scooter near the peppermint-striped steel beam that closes
the last exit in the wall . pretending to have engine trouble, he
measured the height of the barrier, found that it was only 37f in .
from the ground . his next step was to search the car rental agencies
in west berlin for a sports car small enough to slip under the beam .
he finally decided on an austin healey sprite, which, without its
windshield, measured 35f in . high . meixner confided in another young
austrian, gave him an exact timetable of his plans and asked him to
prevent any cars on the western side from starting into the barrier
area at the critical moment . at last, when his plans were complete,
meixner drove his little sports car back into east berlin to
margarete's house . margarete crouched in the narrow space behind the
driver's seat ; her mother was wedged into the luggage compartment . "
luckily, " says petite margarete, " mother is just like me . " leaving
nothing to chance, meixner also let air out of his tires to lower the
car . shortly after midnight, meixner drove to the entrance of the
frontier area, showed his austrian passport to a guard, who waved him
on to the customs
officer . bricks for mamma . it was the time for action . instead of
pulling up at the customs shed, meixner gunned his motor, skidded
around the slalom barriers, and shot past the startled guard . looming
before him was that last bar . for one terrifying moment, it seemed too
low to clear . but he had measured well . jamming his foot on the
accelerator, meixner ducked his head and whizzed into west berlin . by
the time he got there, he was going so fast that he left a 96-ft . skid
mark when he jammed on the brakes . safe with his passengers, meixner
explained his escape plan to startled west berlin police : " i figured
it would take the vopos three seconds to draw their weapons once they
realized what i was doing . but i thought i could make it in those
three seconds . besides, we had 30 bricks behind mrs . thurau to
protect her if firing started . /
