algeria a hex ? things began going wrong almost from the
moment gamal abdel nasser sailed into algiers harbor to begin his state
visit . the day he arrived, an algerian minesweeper that had escorted
nasser's yacht sank with the loss of three crewmen . then a pall was
cast over the celebrations by the death of algeria's foreign minister
mohammed khemisti, who had been shot by a crazed assassin (see
milestones) . on top of all that, a most unusual tornado swept across
the country, killing twelve algerians in one village . many a
superstitious algerian peasant was convinced that the egyptian visitor
had brought a hex with him . but there was a more concrete reason for
the disappointment nasser took with him last week when he pulled up
anchor and sailed away three days earlier than planned . from host
ahmed ben bella, algeria's young premier, nasser had gotten hearty
cordiality and words of acclaim, but no real promise to bring algeria
into nasser's scheme for a united arab republicsciple . as the only two
socialist rulers in the araz world, they had much in common . and ben
bella was duly grateful to nasser for his aid in the long struggle
against france . but at the conference table, nasser found ben bella to
be no fawning disciple . cool, tough and independent, the algerians
appeared more interested in their own revolution than in more grandiose
schemes . ten months after independence, algeria's 46-year-old bachelor
premier is busy consolidating personalized control over his restive
land . last month he eliminated his most dangerous rival, old
revolutionary comrade mohammed khider, by forcing him out as
secretary-general of algeria's ruling national liberation front . ben
bella took over the party post himself . also, ben bella is implanting
his own brand of " arab socialism . " he has nationalized one-third of
algeria's farm land, most of it french-owned, and handed it to "
management committees " of turbaned peasants . his regime has seized
scores of cinemas, hotels and restaurants from algerians who, in ben
bella's words, " fattened themselves like pashas " by buying up
property from fleeing frenchmen . unspoken alliance . but ben bella's
brand of socialism has distinct limits . algeria's chief alliance is a
strange, unspoken one, not with the communists or with any arab land .
it is with france, algeria's onetime overlord . as if to make clear its
continued endorsement of ben bella, france recently agreed to speed up
payment of its subsidies to algeria, budgeted for $210 million this
year, which comprise ben bella's chief economic support . in return,
algeria promises to use one-fifth of the total to compensate
expropriated french landlords .
