russia the view from lenin hills about a month ago, soon after
nikita khrushchev touched off a general crackdown on modern art (time,
dec . 14), several hundred soviet artists and writers were abruptly
summoned to the modern, glass-walled reception palace at lenin hills,
on the outskirts of moscow . khrushchev himself, it seemed, wanted to
hear what poets and painters thought of the party line on avant-garde
art . the argument raged for five hours, far into the night, and
included several remarkably frank exchanges with the soviet ruler . one
of the first to speak up was aging journalist-propagandist ilya
ehrenburg, 71 . defending a cezanne-like blue and purple canvas called
female nude, done by russian painter robert falk in 1922, which art
critic khrushchev had derided, ehrenburg said : " you and i, nikita
sergeevich, are getting on and haven't got much time left . but falk's
painting will live as long as there are lovers of beauty . " next,
abstract sculptor ernst neizvesnty, whose work also had been attacked
by nikita, took the floor . " you may not like my work, comrade
khrushchev, " the sculptor said, " but it has the warm admiration of
such eminent soviet scientists as kapitsa and landau . " retorted
khrushchev scornfully : " that's not why we admire kapitsa and landau
. " neizvesnty fell silent, but official kremlin poet evgeny evtushenko
rose to his friend's defense . " he came back from the war with 14
bullets in his body, " said evtushenko, " and i hope he will live many
more years and produce many more fine works of art " as people say, "
shot back nikita brutally, " only the grave corrects a hunchback . "
evtushenko managed a brave reply : " i hope, comrade khrushchev, we
have outlived the time when the grave was used as a means of correction
. " the audience was stunned, then burst into applause ; even
khrushchev sheepishly joined in . evtushenko's display of courage did
not last long . two weeks after the lenin hills meeting, the party's
ideological boss, leonid ilyichev, called in the poet and a number of
other young intellectuals for an attitude talk . ilyichev was
especially angry over evtushenko's poem babi yar, which condemned
soviet anti-semitism and which had just been enthusiastically received
in a new symphonic setting by composer dmitry shostakovich . cultural
commissars quickly canceled further performances of the symphony . as
for the poem, said ilyichev, it should be changed to include an attack
on west germany . after a sleepless night, evtushenko agreed to "
improve " babi yar .
