south viet nam the pinprick war lumbering low over stone
age villages and thick jungles, troop-carrying helicopters swarmed
across the wild central highlands of viet nam last week . on the
ground, 10,000 south vietnamese infantrymen and marines spread out over
a vast, inhospitable sector south of tamky where no government troops
had set foot since 1938 . in one of the biggest drives against the
communist viet cong since the guerrilla war broke out in 1959, south
viet nam's government hoped to flush six red battalions and a
headquarters company from its longtime stronghold in the mountains .
main object of the month-long operation was to destroy viet cong food
caches and cut the reds' main supply line, the 400-mile ho chi minh
trail to north viet nam through neutral laos . the reds had plainly
evacuated the area in advance, but vietnamese officials explained that
they did not aim to kill viet cong guerrillas, only to isolate them .
if successful, said one, the sweep " will solve 50 per cent of our
military problems in the central highlands . " not so, retorted some of
the u.s . officers who were taking part . " it would take a whole u.s .
army division to block that trail, " said one . the clash of opinion
extends to virtually every aspect of the frustrating, wearisome war in
south viet nam and reflects its shadowy, hide-and-seek nature . it is a
war with no front lines and no decisive battles ; a war of
containment, not of conquest ; a war of lilliputian pinpricks and
brobdingnagian stakes . it is a day war and a night war, in which the
government controls most highways and waterways by daylight (though a
u.s . lieutenant and two vietnamese soldiers were killed in a daylight
roadside ambush last week), and the viet cong slip in from jungles and
swamps to take charge after dark . in the rugged north, it is a
mountain war, in which the reds are short of food, medicine, weapons,
and largely on the defensive ; in the south, it is a battle for the
nation's rice granary, where the guerrillas have cunningly foiled every
government attempt to clean them out . turning the corner . how is the
war actually going ? measured against the desperate situation that
faced general maxwell taylor on a fact-finding mission for the
president 19 months ago, there is room for qualified optimism . when
secretary of defense robert mcnamara returned from a conference with
service chiefs in pearl harbor last week, the pentagon said " the
corner has definitely been turned toward victory . " no one was setting
any timetable, but u.s . military chiefs and south viet nam's president
ngo dinh diem say that the war should be won " within three years . "
there are many soldiers in south viet nam who consider this wildly
optimistic ; some believe that the war may never be won . but almost
everyone agrees that things have improved . today there is little
danger that the viet cong will take over any of south viet nam's cities
. captured red documents indicate that they have given up hope of a
swift conquest, now aim merely, as the guerrillas' north vietnamese
boss ho chi minh said recently, " to wait out the americans . " the
south vietnamese government and its 14,000 u.s . military " advisers "
pin their hopes on an integrated, long-term plan that aims at isolating
and driving out the viet cong . basic element of the government's
battle plan is to resettle almost the entire rural population in some
12,000 " strategic hamlets, " with bamboo fences, barbed wire and armed
militiamen to keep the predatory viet cong from exacting food and
manpower from a helpless peasantry . already 8,000,000 villagers 59 per
cent of south viet nam's population are living in the 6,000 hamlets
that have so far been completed . problem with peasants . though the
government admits that fewer than onethird of the hamlets are
defensible against a determined onslaught, the reds are reluctant to
attack the villages for fear of antagonizing the people . in some
areas, thanks to higher standards of living in the hamlets, peasants
are for the first time informing government troops of the movements of
the viet cong . " if these people believe we can protect them with the
hamlets, " says one u.s . adviser, " our problem may be licked . "
however, most south vietnamese peasants are still either passive or
actively resentful of the diem regime, which is often personified by
oppressive, corrupt local administrators . for all his high hopes for
the program, aloof, autocratic president diem seldom stirs far from his
yellow palace in saigon to visit the hinterland and generate enthusiasm
for his cause .
sneaky petes . the area of the government's greatest frustration is the
mekong river delta, where 55 per cent of south viet nam's population is
centered and 75 per cent of its rice is grown . the peasants there have
resisted the hamlet program and have often been forcibly resettled in
fortified villages because they resent having to walk miles to their
paddies . in a successful attack on two hamlets last month, some 2,000
villagers simply vanished . the reds are particularly hard to flush out
of the delta because they often are impossible to distinguish from
peaceful peasants . on the other hand, u.s . special service troops "
sneaky petes " have made dramatic progress in the north by winning over
and training the dark-skinned, aboriginal montagnards . though they
have for centuries been victimized by the lowland vietnamese, who
contemptuously call them moi (savages), 150,000 montagnards now belong
to an aggressive, native force . help for bananas . militarily, the
decisive factor in the war to date has been the introduction of some
170 u.s.-piloted helicopter transports, which give the government's
troops the advantages of surprise and mobility that had hitherto been
the guerrillas' monopoly . the antiquated " banana " copters have
become increasingly vulnerable as the viet cong learn how to use new
rapid-fire weapons ; in one sortie near the delta village of apbac
last january, they downed five of 14 helicopters, including one of the
24 fast, rocket-firing hu-1b ( " huey " ) helicopters that now escort
most missions . last week a second company of 24 hueys arrived at a new
base near vinh long . " operations were down in the hundreds a year
ago, " says general paul harkins, commander of u.s . forces in south
viet nam . " now they're in the thousands . " but normal battlefield
statistics are largely meaningless . the viet cong's casualty rate is
rising, but the reds have actually increased their hard-core strength
(to an estimated 25,000) by recruiting more peasants . and though the
reds are losing many weapons, those that they are capturing are modern
mortars and machine guns, while those that they lose to government
forces are generally crude devices and obsolete rifles . vain pleas .
as the government troops become more efficient, the wily viet cong are
also learning new techniques . one of the viet cong's latest tactics
has been to mount a series of feinting attacks on a target, then to
withdraw, luring government reserve forces into a well-laid ambush . as
a result, badly needed reinforcements often hang back for fear of
walking into a trap . such a war is a new and frustrating experience
for u.s . military advisers . mindful of the fact that 73 americans
have lost their lives in the fighting so far, their most bitter
complaint is that military operations are constantly hobbled by
political considerations . the big command decisions have to be cleared
with president diem, who still leans heavily on such members of his
family as brother ngo dinh nhu, and the beauteous madame nhu, for
advice and support in the struggle against the communists . diem is
mistrustful of many of his best soldiers and fears also that continued
heavy casualties will undermine what public support he enjoys . u.s .
officers have pleaded in vain with diem to allow more small-unit
sallies and night operations to challenge the viet cong's after-dark
supremacy . in their impatience with diem, some exasperated u.s .
officials wish that he could be replaced by a more flexible man . but
they admit that there is no other leader in sight . the regime tends to
exaggerate its successes and minimize its failures, insists that its
airborne attacks have finally " disheartened " the reds and " caught
them off balance . " many combat-seasoned u.s . advisers think that
this is hardly enough . " hell, " says one, " if all we did was to keep
them off balance on guadalcanal, we'd still be there . " the advisory
war . strategically and politically, of course, the war for viet nam
has little in common with the battle of guadalcanal . the u.s . is not
running the war, but is trying to help a sensitive young nation to win
for itself . it is a guerrilla war in which, as president diem says, "
psychological aspects " may prove more important than killing the enemy
even though, in the u.s . view, his regime has done far too little, too
late, to win the support of the rural populace . after prolonged
pressure, the government agreed only last week to assume the $17
million annual cost of the hamlet program the u.s . in addition has
been spending $400 million a year in south viet nam and even this
reluctant decision by diem was largely influenced by fear that the
villagers were showing greater loyalty to u.s . administrators than to
the regime . distressing as they may be, the differences of opinion
between the government and its u.s . advisers are unlikely to abate .
in fact, if the war turns more clearly in south viet nam's favor, the
regime will probably become more impatient of u.s . advice . for the
vietnamese, it is,
after all, a war
for independence .
