sarawak the rajah's return the brookes of
sarawak might have stepped from the pages of a conrad novel . the first
and last english family to occupy an oriental throne, they fought
pirates and hostile sultans, pacified head-hunters and brought the
white man's law to their cruel, vibrantly beautiful land in northwest
borneo . the brooke rajahs ruled their kentucky-size kingdom with the
stern dignity of a victorian paterfamilias, but with humanity and
imagination as well ; in the annals of colonialism, few dynasties have
been so selflessly devoted to their subjects' welfare . the first
brooke rajah was james, a wealthy, high-minded adventurer who sailed
out from england to " rid the malay archipelago of barbarism . " in
sarawak he found his opportunity . for the sultan of brunei, he subdued
a stubborn civil war between the malays and dyaks . in gratitude for
his services (plus $2,000 of brooke's cash), the oppressive sultan in
1841 made him rajah of sarawak . indifferent to crocodiles, boa
constrictors and poisoned arrows, the white rajah lived only for his
handsome, amiable people . in 1848 he was knighted by her britannic
majesty, and in 1864 britain recognized his raj . he died a bachelor in
1868 and was succeeded by his nephew charles, who ruled for 50 years .
ranee pan . the rajah who brought sarawak into the modern world was
charles brooke's son, who took over in 1917 . in the more humdrum world
of the 20th century, witty, cambridge-educated sir charles vyner brooke
became even more of a legend than his predecessors . he issued his own
stamps, flew his own flag, maintained his own army and police force .
his ranee was sylvia brett, the beautiful daughter of a viscount who,
it was said, had been sir james barrie's inspiration for peter pan .
another literary admirer was george bernard shaw . when sylvia married
the rajah in 1911, he wrote : ride a cock horse to sarawak cross to
see a young ranee consumed with remorse . she'll have bells on her
fingers, and rings through her nose, and won't be permitted to wear any
clothes . the brookes had three pretty daughters, who grew up in
england and were known to every tabloid reader as princess gold,
princess baba and princess pearl . at a glittering society wedding in
1933, gold became lady inchcape, but baba and pearl were toasted in
every pub when they were married : baba to a wrestler, pearl to a
bandleader .
stockpiling heads . their father
had little time for frivolity . a shrewd, selfeffacing administrator,
sir charles traveled to the far corners of his land persuading tribal
chiefs to end their wars and forswear head-hunting . when they
protested that their enemies' heads were needed to propitiate the gods,
the rajah ordered his english civil servants to stockpile mummified
leftovers from previous wars and to lend them out to the villagers as
needed . from his handsome riverside fortress in kuching, he brought
modest prosperity to the kingdom by exploiting its oil and rubber
resources as well as diamonds, birds' nests (for chinese gourmets) and
gutta-percha (for golf balls) . in 1941, celebrating the 100th
anniversary of the brooke
raj, sir charles gave
his people a constitution and set them on the road to self-government .
contemplating war-ravaged sarawak in 1946, sir charles sadly realized
that his raj had become an anachronism in the postwar world . ceding
sarawak to britain, he explained that his people would find " new hope
in an era of widening enlightenment, stability and social progress . "
another chance . when sir charles retired to london, with a $2.8
million trust fund that will ultimately revert to sarawak, the natives
fought bitterly against british rule, even killed the second governor,
who occupied the brookes' old palace . the country has never recovered
from the loss of its leader . when the malaysian federation (time
cover, april 12) comes into existence in august, strifetorn sarawak
will be one of its states and will have its best opportunity yet to
achieve prosperity and stability . the last white rajah did not live to
see that day . last week, at 88, sir charles vyner brooke died in his
london home . when the news reached sarawak, the spirit-worshiping
dyaks rejoiced, for they knew that his soul would return to the
stream-laced land of his fathers .
not to be confused, however, with
hemingway's fictional lady brett ashley or the reallife sylvia ashley .
