southern rhodesia breaking the rules she was picking corn . he was
watching . " it was not love at first sight, " recalls stuart
fuller-sandys, 50, of his first glimpse of margaret dube, 22 . " love
came later like a deluge . " there was only one serious complication :
she was black, and he was white . on the front pages of every southern
rhodesia paper last week was the fairytale romance of the rich, widowed
white rancher to the penniless darky daughter of one of his squatter
tenants . it began in 1961, and had pygmalion overtones . in his
iron-roofed big house, fuller-sandys, like henry higgins, daily gave
margaret lessons in the social graces of the region . margaret learned
to speak and read, slowly mastered the assembly of cutlery for a
four-course dinner . for hours, teacher and pupil pored over arithmetic
primers, encyclopedias and fashion magazines . one evening
fuller-sandys gazed at her in a special way ; she said yes and in
english . promptly fullersandys called on her gnarled father, an aged
and respected laborer on the place . naturally, fuller-sandys handed
over a bride price ($100) ; then fuller-sandys slipped a diamond
engagement ring on margaret's finger . it was a brave step in
white-ruled southern rhodesia . immediately the government fired
fuller-sandys as an adviser in the native affairs department, curtly
explaining : " you cannot administer africans and sleep with them . "
of 48 white friends fuller-sandys invited to the wedding last week, 34
sent their regrets . the beaming bride, carrying a bouquet of white
dahlias and wearing a white satin gown, had three african bridesmaids
for the ceremony on fuller-sandys's veranda, performed by the rev .
richard hughes, rector of an anglican church at que que 64 miles away .
that night, under a full moon, the wedded couple attended an african
celebration in their honor . there was much leap-dancing and yelling
around a campfire . during the evening fuller-sandys had a chance to
open a letter delivered to him earlier in the day . bearing neither
return address nor signature, it said, " you bloody white kaffir, what
a disgrace to the country you are . . . your beloved black bastard
isn't even good looking . " he read the note, then handed it to his
bride . after a moment, she replied quietly : " it doesn't matter,
dear . /
