greece traveling tall the glory that is greece last week played
host to the grandeur that is charles de gaulle . french surete agents
flew in ahead of time to go over the dossiers of resident foreigners
and eye new arrivals at hellenikon airport . greek army engineers
prowled the sewers of athens, searching for hidden bombs ;
grey-uniformed cops stood guard 25 yards apart along the eight-mile
parade route . emotionally, a retired greek general announced that he
was personally ready to slash his wrists to give blood, if de gaulle
were shot . more prudently, greece's premier constantine karamanlis had
his own blood typed, in case he got in the way of any shooting .
drifting smoke . in the event, the precautions seemed excessive . de
gaulle arrived promptly at noon in his blue-andwhite caravelle jet
airliner, inspected an honor guard as cannon smoke from the 21-gun
salute drifted into his face, then climbed into a rolls-royce
convertible with greece's tall king paul . as the motorcade reached the
city limits, de gaulle jumped to his feet, waved theatrically to the
athenians gathered under the pepper trees . at hadrian's arch, near the
temple of olympian zeus, he said with feeling : " no frenchman,
especially myself, could fail to be moved by this city, nor forget what
has been accomplished here for liberty in 3,000 years . " then he
plunged nearsightedly into the curbside crowd to shake hands a
procedure that gives his security guards perpetual jitters . but the
chance of a potshot at de gaulle was not the only worry of greek
leaders . the government was also uneasy that de gaulle might try to
embroil greece in his quarrel with britain over the common market, and
with the u.s . over nato defense . it was france, not greece, which had
pushed the trip . de gaulle had picked up an invitation made seven
years before to then president rene coty . paris also suggested that
the french fleet drop anchor in the piraeus to coincide with de
gaulle's arrival, and discreetly broached the plan of having de gaulle
address the greek public, as he had done with such success during his
german tour last year . when greek reaction to both ideas was cool,
they were abandoned . the hinge . nevertheless, greece was in a mood to
be wooed by le grand charles . athens officials were shocked last
summer, when the $20 million annual u.s . defense and economic aid was
abruptly cut off on the theory that the greek economy no longer needed
it . de gaulle is said to be prepared to climax his visit with an offer
of a $10 million development loan ; french investments in greece
already total $60x million and are second only to u.s . investment . at
a palace banquet, de gaulle made clear in a toast to king paul that he
hopes to extend france's influence from the " northern seas, " which he
called one of france's boundaries, to the eastern mediterranean, where,
he pointed out, greece is the " hinge between the latin and slavic
worlds, as well as between western europe and the middle east . " these
words, and de gaulle's wooing manner, set diplomats everywhere to a
fresh study of his upcoming ambitious travel plans : in october,
charles de gaulle, 72, is scheduled to visit iran and he is considering
later trips to japan, south america, north africa, and the newly
independent nations of black africa . " today, france, " murmured one
dazzled observer . " tomorrow the world . /
