italy search for the feasible in rome's handsome,
half-moon-shaped chamber of deputies last week, everyone had to move
literally to the right to make room for the 166 newly elected
communists, a 20 per cent increase over their previous showing .
the reds promptly made their power felt in the balloting for presiding
officers : for the first time in history, a woman, maria lisa rodano,
42, was elected chamber vice president . she is a communist who insists
she is a roman catholic as well and attends mass on sundays . red boss
palmiro togliatti's cocky demand that communists be admitted to the
government was coldly refused . only solution . red jubilance was
matched by continued dissension in the christian democratic party .
focus of blame for the party's 4 per cent drop in votes is
premier amintore fanfani . hardfisted deputy mario scelba declared red
success " is the fruit of our mistakes and not of the superiority of
communist ideals . " scelba and others of the center and right strongly
oppose a continuance of the apertura a sinistra, the so-called opening
to the left, initiated last year by fanfani when he formed his alliance
with pietro nenni's socialists . trouble is, no other alliance seems
feasible . for the christian democrats, a coalition with the rightwing
monarchists and neo-fascists is unthinkable . " given the parliamentary
situation and the prevalent trends among the party, ented milan's
corriere della sera, " no solution is possible other than the so-called
center left . " what seems less certain is that pintsized, peppery
amintore fanfani will survive as premier . in accordance with italian
procedure, fanfani last week handed his resignation to president
antonio segni, who is expected to name a premier-designate this week
nfani is passed over, no . 1 candidate for the office will be the
christian democrats' tall, unassuming aldo moro, 46, who became interim
party leader in 1959 and has since emerged as party strongman . only a
caretaker . moro is said to be reluctant to take on the job, and his
lavish praise for fanfani at the party's national council meeting last
week suggested that he, for one, would press for little amintore's
continuance in office . in any case, he would not likely change
fanfani's policies, since he himself was one of the architects of the
apertura a sinistra and forced party acceptance of the plan with a
six-hour speech at last year's national congress of the christian
democrats in naples . but moro is somewhat less enthusiastic than
fanfani about economic planning, and could be expected to be more
outspoken about the need to check the communists . moreover, he might
be a lot more popular . where fanfani enjoys sharp exchanges and is
quick to trade insults, moro is reserved, anxious to avoid angry
debates whenever possible, and detests name calling . says one of his
friends, admiringly, " moro runs the party the way he drives a car . he
keeps both hands on the wheel and both eyes on the road, and he never
drives more than 35 miles an hour . " whether segni chooses moro or
sticks with fanfani, the premiership will probably be no more than a
caretaker's position for the next two months . for not until mid-july
will nenni's socialists hold their annual convention and decide whether
or not to stick with the christian democrats and keep the center-left
alliance alive .
