thailand in the vaccination stage a u.s . air force jet
transport eased onto central thailand's korat airstrip from hawaii last
week and deposited 69 u.s . combat troops in battle dress . they were
the advance unit of the two u.s . army battle groups scheduled to
participate in next month's seato maneuvers involving 25,000 troops
from thailand, the u.s., france, britain, pakistan and the philippines
. at seato headquarters in bangkok, the purpose of the exercise was
explained : " the operation supposes that out of tense conditions near
the border of thailand an enemy force crosses into this country in open
aggression . " across the mekong . though the seato battle plan was
written months ago, recent events in neighboring laos have given it
pressing immediacy . thailand today is particularly vulnerable to what
u.s . ambassador kenneth todd young calls " aggression by seepage . "
some 45,000 north vietnamese, many of whom settled in thailand during
indo-china's war against france, have been heavily infiltrated by
communist agents . among the mountain tribes of the north, there is no
sense of nationality and no loyalty to the central government in
bangkok . what is more, some 9,000,000 thais of lao stock live in the
isolated, scrubby, and impoverished northeastern provinces just across
the muddy mekong river from their ethnic brothers in laos . with nearly
two-thirds of laos currently in communist hands, the entire northeast
has been exposed to red subversion . posing as peddlers, river boatmen
and wandering troubadours, communist infiltrators from laos pass out
clothing and medicine, improvise antigovernment verses on old folk
songs . " lao will be lao, " they say . " the people living in this
area are laos ; those who live beyond korat are thais . " communism is
never mentioned ; instead, the reds constantly harp on the theme that
the government has wilfully neglected the northeast, promise villagers
a salary of $150 a month (v . thailand's per capita income of $105 a
year) if they will join forces with the laotian reds . wells on wheels
. spurred by the discovery of hidden communist arms caches and reports
of red supply drops by parachute in the northeast, premier sarit
thanarat has begun a crash program to counteract red influence in the
area . earmarking $300 million in development funds, he has already
sent out two of a planned twelve mobile development units to drill
fresh-water wells, bulldoze new roads, and dispense medical care .
under the guidance of thailand's sharpest and most aggressive young
civil servants, who once shunned the northeast as a kind of siberia,
schools are being built and electric generators installed to provide
power . government information teams are crisscrossing the northeast
stressing the advantages of thai unity . sarit's speed has been
characteristic of his rule since he seized power in 1957 . " anybody
can stage a revolution, " he said then . " the trick, once the
revolution has been staged, is winning public approval . " sarit has
succeeded admirably . yoz 54, sarit came into prominence as a
hard-drinking, hard-wenching army field marshal who once showed up at
an embassy dinner party in bangkok carrying his own liquor, with the
complaint that his host's hooch was second rate . cirrhosis of the
liver and the responsibility of power calmed him down . though he once
was involved in various devious deals, he slashed corruption to the
minimum . " he wants his name in the history books, not his money in a
swiss bank account, " an observer explained . some foreign help . sarit
cracked down hard on the communists, outlawed trade with red china .
helped by more than $750 million in u.s . aid, he stabilized the
economy, achieved a hefty trade balance, and socked away more than $500
million in foreign-exchange reserves that encouraged foreign investment
and industrial expansion . the u.s.-built friendship highway
facilitated the movement of crops to market, and the government began
an agricultural diversification program to lessen dependence on rice,
thailand's single cash crop . today, the u.s . maintains some 4,500
military personnel in thailand . they help build roads, fly helicopters
and operate u.s.-thai radar stations . one group of navy seabees is
building a 6,200 yard jet airstrip near the frontier with laos . in
next month's maneuvers thailand's tough, modern-equipped, 80,000man
army will work to perfect its counterinsurgency techniques . more than
its neighbors, thailand has a motive to fight against a potential
communist takeover ; of all the nations in southeast asia, thailand
alone has never been dominated by a colonial power, has been
independent since the 13th century . sarit is confident that his
program will keep it so . " the situation was quite serious, " he
admits, " but since we started to move in the northeast, the danger has
become less acute . " adds a top military aide : " thailand is in the
vaccination stage . we don't have the disease of communism . if we
vaccinate now, we won't fall ill . /
