morocco experimenting with elections arab and african leaders
generally sneer at hassan ii of morocco because he is a king in an era
of crumbled monarchies . yet such " progressives " as egypt's nasser
and ghana's nkrumah would not dare to let their own people indulge in
the measure of press freedom and political democracy that hassan
allowed in last week's national elections . at stake were 144 seats for
a house of representatives, the first freely elected chamber since
morocco won independence from france seven years ago, and the field was
wide open . hassan's major opposition parties, the nationalist istiqlal
and the leftist national union of popular forces, were out in strength,
and even the communist party officially outlawed but quietly tolerated
fielded three candidates . opposition newspapers circulated freely, and
one prominent politician got away with calling the king a liar . two
months before the election, hassan also entered the race by having his
closest confidant, interior-agriculture minister ahmed reda guedira,
40, organize a pro-hassan party christened the front for the defense of
constitutional institutions . unsurprisingly, the f.d.c.i . enjoyed the
use of government vehicles to haul wondering tribesmen to rallies, plus
the organized support of the government's administrative bureaucracy .
flush with campaign cash, f.d.c.i . leader guedira (who got some
pointers when he witnessed the 1960 u.s . election campaign) passed out
thousands of free miniature soccer balls, t-shirts and campaign buttons
bearing the royalist party color (yellow) . more important for hassan,
however, was the traditional apathy of morocco's 75 per cent illiterate
population . in the ancient city of fez, a heavily veiled scrubwoman
candidly declared, " i do not know what it is all about, but i am going
to vote for my king . " hassan's royalists expected to win enough seats
to assure the king of a plurality . in any case, he did not have to
worry much, for there were limits to his experiment in democracy .
under a new constitution he personally drafted last year, he can
dissolve the house at any time he chooses .
