saudi arabia the ailing, failing king in recent months
62-year-old kingsaud of saudi arabia has suffered a succession of
intestinal, stomach, chest, circulatory and heart ailments . often they
seem to be aggravated by the swirling political events in his desert
capital of riyadh . after the yemen rebellion last fall threatened the
stability of his throne, saud's health was so upset that he turned the
government over to his able brother, prince feisal, and flew to
switzerland for treatment . while saud spent weeks convalescing in
paris and on the riviera, prince feisal was using a new broom at home .
he fired all of saud's sons and aides who held government posts, and
cut royal family allowances a whopping 20 per cent . in a series of
speeches, feisal told wide-eyed citizens : " with god's help, you and
your government are going the right way . education, medical care and
social security are all completely free . " in answer to doleful pleas
from his sons and relations, king saud cautiously returned home last
month . a few tribal delegations came to riyadh to pay their respects .
one, led by deputy premier prince khalid, another of saud's 39
brothers, handed the king an ultimatum . tactfully but plainly, the
chieftains warned him not to interfere with feisal or make any attempt
again to wield power, at the risk of dethronement . they also demanded
instant banishment of saud's personal aide, eid ben salem, who rose
from palace chauffeur to royal entrepreneur and became vastly rich in
the process . saud caved in . ordered out of the country, ben salem,
who has his fortune stashed in european banks, flew off nonchalantly to
beirut . forty-eight hours later, saud got an even worse shock : one
of his favorite wives, handsome princess im mansour, vanished from the
palace to join her lover, ben salem, in exile . the personal and
political blows combined to impair the regal health once again . moslem
pilgrims to mecca who were booked on half a dozen jet flights home
suddenly found their passages had been canceled . instead, the
airliners flew to riyadh, picked up the ailing king and his huge
retinue, and carried them off to vienna . at week's end king saud was
reportedly in an oxygen tent, responding to treatment for a duodenal
ulcer . doctors predicted recovery within a few weeks, but rumors still
filtered through vienna that saud was in fact quite ill . should saud
die, prince feisal will become king in name as well as in fact .
