africa together at the " summit " the normally sleepy ethiopian
capital of addis ababa was astir with feverish activity last week .
crowds of ragged citizens stood gaping as workmen rushed to install
huge portraits of prominent africans across from haile selassie's
palace . finishing touches were being put on a spanking new hotel .
mile after mile of 8-ft.-high corrugated iron fence was being put in
place along main streets to hide the city's shabby slums . all the
excitement was in anticipation of this week's pan-african " summit "
conference of some 30 african heads of state . never before had so many
leaders of africa sat down in the same place at the same time, and
their proud host, the aging (70) ethiopian emperor, was out at the
airport in person with his green-andblack rolls-royce to greet many of
his illustrious guests, including liberia's president william v .
shadrach tubman, who arrived five days early so as to squeeze in a
state visit . the guest list was a who's who of africa's successful
revolutionaries and moderate nation builders . ghana's egocentric
osagyefo (redeemer), kwame nkrumah, was due in from accra . from the
congo would come the embattled premier cyrille adoula . also on the
list : nigeria's able prime minister sir abubakar tafawa balewa ;
senegal's senghor ; guinea's sekou toure ; and dozens more,
including, of course, that affable fellow from up north, egypt's gamal
abdel nasser, who was an african of a kind . predictably, there were
those interested in bending the conference to their own ends :.
ghana's nkrumah sent a 120-member delegation piling into addis ababa
complete with a high-life dance band . osagyefo would be peddling his
pet scheme for a bicameral all-africa parliament and other similar
quickie approaches to a united africa . no one was likely to buy
nkrumah's schemes, however, for it has long been obvious to all of
africa that it is basically nkrumah that nkrumah wants to promote .
apart from that, regional differences make it clear that the most that
can be achieved in the foreseeable future is a loose association of
african countries patterned after the organization of american states,
with a permanent secretariat, council and program for economic
cooperation . such a grouping might help heal the rifts among the
continent's current rival blocs chief among them the leftleaning
casablanca group (ghana, guinea, mali, morocco, algeria, egypt), and
the more moderate monrovia group, now composed of nigeria, liberia,
sierra leone, ethiopia, the former belgian congo, and most of the
former french dependencies .
