europe first, the shell in major diplomatic conferences on
both sides of the atlantic, the u.s . last week confronted the new,
assertive europe . at geneva, the u.s . started to bargain for its
future economic relations with the common market, which is just five
years old and is already the world's biggest trading bloc . at ottawa,
in recognition of its allies' new strength, the u.s . initiated the
slow, painful process of sharing with europe control of nato's nuclear
armory . if neither conference produced dramatic results, both narrowly
skirted breakdowns that might have gravely damaged the atlantic
partnership . naked europeans . despite france's aversion to
tariff-cutting, u.s . negotiators at geneva hoped to achieve
far-reaching liberalization of world trade through president kennedy's
trade expansion act . special envoy christian herter and his 20-man
delegation who were dubbed " onward christian's soldiers " by the press
corps aimed for an agreement whereby europe and the u.s . would make
big, equal, across-the-board percentage cuts on huge categories of
goods . nothing doing, retorted the europeans, who pointed out that u.s
. tariffs are generally higher than europe's, while the highest u.s .
tariffs cover far more goods (20 per cent of all u.s . tariffs are over
30 per cent v . 1 per cent of europe's) . thus, protested eurocrats, if
european nations cut their already lower tariffs by the same percentage
as the u.s., they would end up " naked, " while the u.s . would still
be comparatively well protected . in any case, shrugged europeans, the
u.s . in 1962 earned nearly twice as much ($4.4 billion) in the common
market as it bought from the six . so why make things easier for the
americans ? inside the egg . the talks actually had broken down, when
west germany's ludwig erhard devised the last-ditch compromise that
proved acceptable to john f . kennedy . it calls for both sides to make
equal, across-the-board percentage reductions, as proposed by the u.s .
though they will probably fall far short of the ideal 50 per cent
envisaged by washington . in return, the u.s . agreed in principle to
make drastic cuts in the highest tariff categories . since the fine
print will not actually be negotiated until may 1964, some u.s . and
british officials were fearful, as one put it, that " france has only
moved her roadblock down the road . " concluded erhard : " we are
agreed on the shell of an egg . what will be in the egg, we do not know
. " at ottawa everyone knew what was in the egg, but no one knew what
to call it . well in advance of last week's semiannual nato council
meeting, the u.s . and its allies had agreed on a new addition to
nato's alphabetical armory : ianf, meaning interallied nuclear force .
a limited first step toward giving nato its own nuclear deterrent, ianf
now consists mainly of 180 british v-bombers and three
mediterranean-based u.s . polaris submarines that the two nations will
turn over to nato command . while it also includes 60 french tactical
bombers, for which the u.s . controls the nuclear warheads, the french
government hinted that it might withdraw them if ianf were made to seem
bigger and more powerful as it is than france's vaunted force de frappe
. thus the allies agreed that if france agreed not to make any scenes
at ottawa, ianf would be nameless it soon became known as that thing by
any name, the new force is intended to give the nato allies a greater
sense of participation in nuclear strategy, but will do little to
increase their actual role in the defense of europe . a more
significant development, in the u.s . view, would be formation of a
multilateral force (mlf), comprising some 20 polaris-firing surface
vessels that would be jointly owned, crewed and paid for by the
participating allies . its main purpose, of course, would be to
accommodate west germany's eagerness for a nuclear role commensurate
with its economic and political power . but the u.s . will have to
yield far more if it is to meet its allies' demands for control of
their own nuclear defense . in ottawa, as at geneva, the dialogue had
barely begun
