great britain trollope, hot tide better education . new industries
. better transport . that promise, in five columns of type across
newspaper pages, was made last week by the conservative party,
launching its first advertising campaign since its
you-never-had-it-sogood series in 1959 . the tories' new theme : "
britain is modernizing now and only the conservatives have got what it
takes to see the job through . " though the government has yet to set a
date for the election, the costly manifesto suggested that prime
minister macmillan intends to go to the people sooner rather than later
perhaps in the fall . next day the opposition burst into print with its
own long-planned ad campaign featuring a new symbol, a well-knuckled
thumbs up the toiler's equivalent of the tory v-for-victory gesture and
the slogan : let's go with labor . the laborites devoted half of their
first bold spread to a picture of party leader harold wilson for once
without a pipe and used the rest of the space to explain the " changes
the new labor government intends to make . " they ranged from a
shake-up in industry ( " too many directors sitting in board rooms
because of their family background " ) to an expanded scientific
program to " prevent our best brains from taking jobs abroad . " if
there was nothing startlingly new in labor's promises or, for that
matter, in the tories' copy many britons were astonished that the
socialists had taken any advertising at all . after the 1959 election
campaign, laborites thundered that the tories' ad agency had used "
madison avenue methods " to " sell macmillan like a detergent . " when
he projects his own image, harold macmillan sounds more like trollope
than tide . in an interview with publisher jocelyn stevens in last
week's issue of queen magazine, the prime minister indulged in some
mellow ruminations that could never have been cued by an adman : on
power . i never had any feeling about becoming prime minister . i took
things as they came and still do . power is like a dead sea fruit .
when you achieve it, there's nothing there . the art of government is
mixing the thinkers and doers . on himself . yes i am sensitive to
criticism . one has to be . there are moments when i loathe everybody,
and then i retire and read gibbon for a few hours . . . i am a
highlander . that's why i'm so pale . it's true i get a bit tired, but
i soon pop up again . on his wardrobe . my clothes edwardian ? i
thought that cardigans were rather smart at the moment . i always wear
the same suit . when it wears out, i tell my tailors to send me another
around . on likes & dislikes . what do i dislike ? questions in the
house of commons ; i can't bear them . what else ? things that have
no purpose formalities like the function i'm going to this evening .
what i really like to do is go off with dorothy in the car, alone, to
scotland . where the hedges cease, there is real freedom . . . no, i
don't get enough exercise, though yesterday i had a four-hour walk
through the woods . i went to see my gamekeeper :. he wasn't too
hopeful about next season's prospects .
