africa a small taste of unity
in the cavernous,
thatch-roofed banquet hall of addis ababa's menelik palace, 30
colorfully garbed african heads of state and 2,000 other guests, all
backslapping and jovial, were feasting at the board of their medaled
host, ethiopan emperor haile selassie . as waiters in green-and-gold
livery moved among foodladen tables, the throng fell to on caviar,
roast chicken, spiced lamb and watt (spongy ethiopian bread), washed
down with hundreds of gallons of french wine, ethiopian honey wine, and
vintage champagne . then, as the clock ticked past midnight, everybody
sat back to watch the emperor's select group of flimsily clad dancing
girls writhe to the tootles of the imperial bodyguard band . " unity
now ! " for all their festive camaraderie at haile selassie's party,
not all the delegates to africa's first " summit conference " last week
were pals . tunisia's habib bourguiba loathes ghana's powerseeking
kwame nkrumah who is jealous of egypt's abdel nasser who despises the
ivory coast's felix houphouetboigny who in turn is contemptuous of
senegal'spoet-president leopold senghor . the antagonisms became amply
evident during the long oratory that flowed out of the conference work
site, haile selassie's proud, new " africa hall . " eyes glittering,
nkrumah took the floor to demand " unity now .e in the form of a vast
united states of africa, ruled by a bicameral congress and a strong
presidency (which, no one doubted, nkrumah feels himself eminently
qualified to occupy) . nkrumah likened the addis ababa meeting to the
1787 constitutional congress in philadelphia, whose delegates, he said,
thought of themselves not as " virginians or pennsylvanians, but simply
americans . " cried ghana's self-styled redeemer : " we meet here
today not as ghanians, guineans, egyptians, algerians, moroccans,
malians, liberians, congolese, or nigerians, but as africans . " slap
for kwame . there was polite applause, but much of the audience was
lukewarm to the ambitious scheme . malagasy's president philibert
tsiranana replied candidly : " you cannot decree a text for african
unity of our states are not mature enough . " urging a slower,
step-by-step approach, sir abubakar tafawa balewa, the able prime
minister of nigeria, africa's most populous state (42 million, six
times ghana's population), took the opportunity to spank nkrumah for
his notorious meddling in his african neighbors' affairs . " unity
cannot be achieved as long as african countries continue subversion
against others, " balewa declared . he drew a storm of cheers, and even
nkrumah's old friend, modibo keita of mali, joined in to denounce "
black imperialism . " with the conference obviously in no mood for
grandstanding, egypt's ubiquitous gamal abdel nasser prudently confined
himself to generalities .
africa's summiteers did
manage to put together an agreement of sorts in their four days of
talks . in a marathon final session, the delegates solemnly and
unanimously adopted a draft charter for a loose " organization of
african unity . " to go into effect when ratified by twothirds of
africa's nations, the scheme calls for a heads-of-state gathering every
year, a permanent council of ministers (with no real powers), and a
permanent secretariat . pending ratification, a provisional secretariat
will be set up in addis ababa, to the delight of haile selassie, who
dreams of making his ramshackle capital africa's capital as well .
under the plan, committees would be formed to mediate intra-african
disputes, promote economic and social progress, joint defense, and
mount a common front against africa's remaining vestiges of colonialism
and white supremacy .
