france apres de gaulle blossoming chestnuts cast their shade over
the bookstalls along the seine, traffic wheeled insanely around the
place de l'etoile, and the first tourists with their cameras sank
contentedly last week into chairs at sidewalk cafes . but to french
politicians, the coming of spring meant revival of that heady
atmosphere they call " apres de gaulle . " with presidential elections
just two years away, it has simultaneously occurred to many pundits
that de gaulle may become ill, die, be assassinated, or just decide not
to run . the infectious presidential fever has spread to all parties .
on the non-gaullist side, possible candidates range from antoine pinay
(at 71, he may be too old) to the last premier of the fourth republic,
pierre pflimlin, to the glib radical spokesman, maurice faure . the
socialists have contenders in veteran guy mollet and the shrewd,
affable mayor of marseille, gaston defferre . most prominent on the
gaullist side are premier georges pompidou, the national assembly's
tennis-playing president jacques chaban-delmas and ex-premier michel
debre . recently elected as a deputy from reunion island, debre cannily
refused the confining job of faction leader of the gaullists in order
to establish himself as mr . fixit for problems throughout the country
. under the spur of debre's competition, pompidou is now functioning
more like a politician and less like a banker turned statesman . in
nationwide broadcasts, he has proved to be a relaxed, avuncular
performer and has displayed wit as well as competence in the national
assembly . into this list of hopefuls, the intellectual, left-wing
l'express last week introduced a weirdly different suggestion . it
claimed that de gaulle's own choice as his successor is none other than
henri d'orleans, 54, comte de paris, descendant of king henri iv, and
pretender to the throne of france . l'express pointed to the warm
personal friendship between the count and de gaulle, recalled that le
grand charles's earliest political sympathies were monarchist, and
noted that the count's gaullist leanings had made him a target of a
bombing by secret army terrorists . l'express concluded : " this
vision is one which haunts de gaulle's meditations, and it would
reconcile two heretofore antagonistic principles monarchy and republic
in a single legitimacy, that of royal descent and universal suffrage .
/ only trouble with this vision is that l'express hates de gaulle and
would be the last paper to know what he is thinking . paris-presse
characterized the story as little more than " a good question to toss
out to get a dinner conversation going . /
