iraq the men of the mountains there the greeks spent a
happy night, with plenty to eat, talking about the struggle now past
for they had been seven days passing through the country of the kurds,
fighting all the time, and they had suffered worse things at the hands
of the kurds than all that the king of persia, and his general,
tissaphernes, could do to them . anabasis of xenophon enemies of the
kurds have always had a hard time of it, from xenophon and his ten
thousand greeks in 400 b.c., through persians, mongols, turks,
crusaders, arabs and british, up to this year, when the regime of
iraq's karim kassem was bled white by the effort to crush one more
uprising of the ever-rebellious kurd strike . in baghdad last week, the
new iraqi regime that deposed and killed kassem in february finally
faced up to the issue of peace or continued war with the kurdish
leader, mustafa barzani . " the very day of the revolt against kassem,
/ said an angry kurdish rebel, " the new iraqi revolutionary command
called for kurdish support . with the revolution, the iraqi armed
forces were totally disorganized, and we could easily have struck deep
into iraq . instead we accepted their promises and held our fire . "
what the kurds are demanding is regional autonomy with a kurdish
legislature and executive council, a proportionate share for kurds of
all revenues, oil royalties and foreign aid and, finally, special
kurdish army units with the sole right to garrison kurdistan . the
iraqi government last week stiffly rejected the kurdish memorandum,
offering them instead only local self-government in a restricted
mountain area that would have excluded virtually all major kurdish
population centers . three plagues . the kurdish homeland begins above
biblical mount ararat and extends south in a long, mountainous loop to
the persian gulf (see map) . because of the accidents of history and
their own inability to unite, the estimated 6,000,000 kurds are today
divided among five different nations : the soviet union, turkey,
syria, iran and iraq . like the kurdish landscape, the kurdish
character has remained constant for thousands of years . many kurds are
tall, fair-skinned and blue-eyed . of life they ask little more than
flocks of broad-tailed sheep, a fine horse, a rifle with sufficient
cartridge bandoleers, and a woman who can bear strong sons . for
generations, the lowland arab has been terrorized by the mountain kurd
. an arab proverb says, " there are three plagues in the world : the
rat, the locust and the kurd . " the kurds reply, " a camel is not an
animal, and an arab is not a human being . " of iraq's 7,000,000
people, at least 1,500,000 are kurds . they live in the foothills of
the zagros mountains, and are divided into 22 major and 54 minor tribes
. unlike the arabs on the river plains, they are hard-working and full
of bounce . broad-shouldered mustafa barzani, 60, has spent most of his
adult life fighting for independence . after world war ii, with russian
backing, barzani became military boss of the soviet-inspired kurdish
people's republic in iran and, when it collapsed, was for twelve years
in exile in the soviet union . the younger brother of the ruling sheik
of the barzan tribe, barzani denies he is a communist, but echoes other
kurdish leaders who say that if war breaks out again the kurds will "
accept all the help we can get from anyone " russians included . shoot
on sight . at week's end, as their delegates still wrangled in baghdad,
both the kurdish rebels and the iraqi army prepared for the worst . the
government proclaimed a dusk-to-dawn curfew around northern iraq's
oilfields, pump stations, airfields, and military depots, warned that
violators would be " shot on sight . " iraqi troops blocked all roads
leading into the zagros mountains . nearly three-quarters of the army
was busy building concrete pillboxes and fortifications covering the
mountain passes . but during the cease-fire the kurds were not idle .
food has been stockpiled, arms replenished, and a standing army of
35,000 readied for battle, backed by a reserve of 100,000 . the rebels
are buttressed by scores of kurdish officers who deserted from the
iraqi army, and are linked by a network of 100 captured field radio
sets . but at week's end, the government called for more negotiations
and promised to reconsider kurdish demands . inturn, the kurds agreed
to hold up hostilities . " we don't want the responsibility for
starting the war again, " said a kurdish spokesman, " but we and the
government are far apart like the distance from ground to sky . /
