egypt everyone's delighted as the troops swung down cairo's
streets last week, the city gave them a delirious welcome . men waved
green branches, women flung flowers from balconies, girls broke through
police lines to loop garlands over the soldiers' necks, and children
scrambled up trees and statues . everyone screamed " marhab bil abtal
! " (welcome to the heroes) as white pigeons wheeled overhead,
helicopters displayed military flags, and mig fighter squadrons
thundered past . the 3,000 troops, the first veterans to return home
from the seven-month civil war in yemen, formed up in republic square,
where president gamal abdel nasser mounted the dais, advanced to a
battery of microphones and cried : " o men ! faithful sons of your
nation, image of its heroes, vanguard of its march to freedom,
socialism and unity, you have witnessed on your way here the delight of
your nation over your victorious return ! " the soldiers clearly
shared the nation's delight, for even egypt's povertystricken villages
would look good after the harsh wilderness of yemen . nasser's
34-minute speech contained menace as well as hyperbole . he got down to
cases about his intentions in yemen, where, up till now, each returning
battalion has been replaced by an equal number of new egyptian levies .
egyptians would remain in yemen, he said, " until it is ascertained
beyond any shadow of a doubt, and beyond deception, that the
reactionary elements have, as a result of their defeat, contained their
rancor against the revolution . " he also sounded a warning to his
baath party rivals in syria, who had just purged their regime of
pro-nasser elements . but his words were curiously mild . during the
twelve days of nasser's trip to algeria and yugoslavia, radio cairo had
made the air waves blue with abuse of syria's baathist leaders . on his
return, nasser abruptly choked off the broadcast vituperation . he gave
a place of honor to a visiting syrian delegation during his republic
square speech and conferred lengthily with the syrians until their
quiet return to damascus at midweek . he had clearly decided that the
moment was not yet ripe for a showdown with baath leaders in both iraq
and syria, especially since the projected tri-state united arab
republic is still not formed . but the fight was not over, and if the
past was any guide, it would not be long before radio cairo was aiming
curses at the arabs who stand in the way of gamal abdel nasser .
