angola bond of blood portuguese infantry patrols in northern
angola peered at the skies last week and waited prayerfully for the end
of the rains . in the third year of their campaign to quell a stubborn
native revolt against portuguese rule, government forces counted on dry
weather to throw armored units and paratroops against the african
guerrillas, who throughout the rainy season had mercilessly harassed
the bogged-down europeans . nonetheless, government troops this season
face tougher odds than ever before in the 2,000 sq . mi . battle zone,
known to the colonists as the rotten triangle . the rebels, admitted a
portuguese officer, have " tremendously " improved their tactics and
firepower in recent months . shuttling freely into angola from
congolese bases across the 400-mile northern border, wily terrorist
bands have replaced machetes and canhangulas, their crude, homemade
muzzle-loaders, with belgian mausers, u.s . carbines and czech machine
guns . and, unlike portugal's 50,000-man expeditionary force, they know
every inch of the terrain . says a longtime white administrator : " it
would take 100,000 men to clean up the triangle . " the rivals . the
bloody fight for angola is the only shooting war still raging in africa
. to win it and " liberate " the continent's biggest colonial
territory, african leaders in addis ababa last week vociferously
supported algerian premier ahmed ben bella's call to " establish a bond
of blood " with the angolan nationalists . the war is a grievous burden
for tiny portugal, which already has western europe's lowest living
standard . but strongman antonio de oliveira salazar, 74, is by now too
deeply committed to preservation of angola as a " province " of
portugal to yield the africans even token self-government without
imperiling his own 31-year reign in lisbon . despite the steady rise in
the guerrillas' strength and effectiveness, salazar's best hope of
victory lies in the bitter enmity between the two nationalist movements
that are struggling to win angola's independence . aid from mulattoes .
the rival rebel groups, both based across the border in the congolese
capital of leopoldville, often seem more intent on destroying each
other than the portuguese . the popular movement for liberation of
angola (m.p.l.a.) is led by smooth, sorbonne-educated mario pinto de
andrade, 34, a mulatto whose backing comes mainly from other
assimilados, the educated half-castes who have long had full portuguese
citizenship ; to widen its appeal, however, an angolan black, poet
agostinho neto, was recently made m.p.l.a.'s nominal leader . andrade,
who, like most of salazar's foes, is often denounced as a communist, is
an astute politician and an able organizer . he has built a nationwide
following among the mulatto elite who would be the logical leaders of
independent angola, and last week in addis ababa urged africa's
statesmen to help lance " the abscess of rivalry " between the two
movements . andrade's offer of cooperation was rejected by his
implacable foe, holden roberto, 38, a member of the far-flung bakongo
tribe, whose union of angolan peoples (u.p.a.) has powerful support
from the congo's premier cyrille adoula, roberto's longtime friend .
the u.p.a . has received aid from tunisia as well . with a training
camp near thysville, 40 miles from the congolese border, roberto's
guerrillas are the only militarily effective rebel group in angola,
though they have not succeeded in extending the conflict beyond the
triangle, where the bakongo and allied tribesmen are dominant . dy's
puppets . " nonetheless, roberto's u.p.a . has fought off insurgents
from andrade's movement . this month, at a makeshift hospital in
leopoldville, three young, algerian-trained m.p.l.a . fighters told a
grim tale of an ambush at the loge river, deep inside the triangle, in
which roberto's men massacred the rest of their 14-man guerrilla unit .
the u.p.a . leader is just as fiercely determined to resist
intervention from any other quarter . to algeria's offer of 10,000
volunteers to fight in angola, roberto snapped : " we will kill them
if they show up . we are nobody's puppets . " roberto, who promises a "
big move soon, " is expected to open a second front in the rich,
cotton-growing malange area, where a savage native uprising was stamped
out in 1961 . with the congo's katanga province now under
leopoldville's control, the anti-portuguese rebels could start moving
in through angola's " back door " as well . roberto has reason to be
confident . it took the french five years and 500,000 troops to achieve
even a stalemate in algeria . portugal is hard pressed to field
onetenth as many men . but lisbon and leopoldville may soon have little
say in the war . the governments of egypt, ghana, guinea and algeria
last week reached broad agreement on a plan to funnel equal aid to
mario pinto de andrade's m.p.l.a . and holden roberto's group . in
angola the portuguese themselves have become increasingly skeptical of
salazar's ability to suppress the rebellion . hard-bitten portuguese
colonists, many of whom were born in angola, have already organized
their own paramilitary volunteer corps to fight the guerrillas and, if
necessary, to wage an o.a.s.-style campaign to preserve white supremacy
in angola . " this is our war, " vowed one grimfaced plantation owner
last week . " we'll all be killed rather than move out . /
