indonesia present & future it has been a month of hatred in
indonesia . more than 500 shops in bandung were wrecked in a single
daykabumi, youthful rioters hurled six automobiles over a precipice .
fistfights were common in dozens of other towns and villages . the ugly
violence has one common denominator : all the victims were chinese,
that minority of 3,000,000 among indonesia's 97 million which by hard
work and nimble brain has extracted wealth from the overheated,
forested archipelago of president sukarno . the racial bitterness beats
even birmingham, for despite repeated government efforts to crack their
economic power, the chinese sometimes operating through middlemen to
circumvent official sanctions still control trade, agriculture, small
industry, the black market and other forms of commerce . " go into even
the smallest village in indonesia, " an indonesian army officer once
complained, " and you will find one man whose house has electric lights
and a refrigerator . that man will be chinese . " we are hungry . "
there is nothing new in indonesia's prejudice, since the overseas
chinese have been running things there for years . but feeling against
the chinese has risen higher as indonesia has slid toward the brink of
economic ruin . inflation is out of control ; banknotes in circulation
have doubled in the past year, and the u.s . dollar, officially pegged
at 45 rupiahs, now gets 1,500 rupiahs on the black market . a good
sarong costs a worker three months' pay, and one indonesian airline
pilot has complained that he can make ends meet only by smuggling in
cameras from hong kong . governmentsubsidized schoolbooks are too
expensive for some students . there are periodic rice shortages, and
production of rubber, copra, and tin on expropriated dutch estates has
declined sharply under the management of fumbling government
bureaucrats . students have staged demonstrations with banners
screaming : " we are hungry . " resentment against the rich, well-fed
chinese minority finally exploded after a fistfight between an
indonesian student and a chinese student at bandung's institute of
technology . when a youthful rioter was shot by police in one town,
mobs with bamboo clubs herded chinese from their houses and made them
bow their heads as his funeral procession passed by . firing over the
heads of a screaming throng in bandung, police brought down a power
line which electrocuted two indonesians . prone to enjoy . predictably,
indonesia's president sukarno blamed neither himself nor his chaotic
economic policies for the riots, said that they were caused by "
counter-revolutionaries trying to capitalize on the food and clothing
situation and on the chinese minority problem . " he went right ahead
with plans to squeeze out western oil companies, though in the process
he risked losing the source of onethird of his nation's total export
earnings . not one to be disturbed long by mere economic questions,
sukarno was more interested in tenure . so as to be able to cope with
any future disorders, he had his rubber stamp congress " appoint " him
to the presidency for life . " this decision might not entirely live up
to certain constitutional requirements, " harrumphed an indonesian
cabinet minister, " but it should be remembered that it is a political
revolutionary product and not a legalistic product . " with his
continued career thus assured, sukarno flew off for what was described
as a long rest in japan, belgrade, vienna, rome, and france, which he
is always prone to enjoy . at sukarno's stop in tokyo last week, the
buss was waiting at the airport in the form of three delectable things
overdressed for the occasion .
