russia sin along with sig to some of the younger staffers in
britain's moscow embassy, smooth, charming sigmund mikhailski was
living proof that a communist needn't be a cad . an interpreter,
smiling sig was hired in 1954 and soon made himself a regular man
friday around the chancery offices on sofiiskaya quay . when no one
else could get bolshoi ballet tickets, sig did . he was equally
skillful at producing hard-to-get goodies, or black-marketing their
clothes or western currency for a handsome profit . he always went out
of his way to help the lonely ones, showed them the sights, even took
them to restaurants where they invariably met russians who seemed not
at all afraid to talk freely with westerners . older embassy hands were
skeptical about sig, knowing that he was probably a soviet spy . after
all, local help in moscow must be hired from u.p.d.k., the government
personnel agency for foreign employers of the embassy fired sig, they
reasoned, he would probably only be replaced by another spy who might
be a bounder to boot . in any case, the younger britons, who invited
him to their parties and went to his, knew that all his friends were
attached to western embassies, and felt certain that he hated the
russians . " you see, " explained sig, " i'm a pole . " he made a
determined pass at every new english girl he met and at the boys as
well . when they resisted, he explained mournfully that life in moscow
was hard on a passionate pole . unusual happenings . alas, poor sig !
one day in 1956, after nearly five years at the embassy, the british
suddenly fired him . not without cause . sig's saga finally came to
light last week in a remarkably bland report by the judicial tribunal
that has spent three months investigating the latest british spy
scandal : the strange case of william john vassall, a homosexual
admiralty clerk who had been assigned to the moscow embassy for two
years, and had been spying for the russians for seven . vassall's
superiors, and all but one of the officers who picked him out of 40
applicants for the moscow assignment, were exonerated by the tribunal,
which judged him " weak " but not overtly queer . however, admitted the
report, vassall's young colleagues in the moscow embassy ridiculed his
/ effeminate " ways and called him " vera . " the passionate pole soon
guessed his secret, and life began anew for vera vassall . eager to
share his new conquest, sig introduced vassall to other gay types . " i
shall never forget, " vassall wrote to an older man in london, " the
many unusual and extraordinary happenings that go on here, which must
come to few people . " he did not apparently regard it as too unusual
when one of his new russian friends photographed him in the act one
evening . it was not until vassall was caught redhanded with a soviet
officer that russian secret police intervened and explained to him the
gravity of his offense . when they threatened to show the compromising
photographs to lady hayter, wife of the ambassador, vassall agreed to
provide them with the classified embassy documents they wanted .
manufactured compromise . during his years at the british embassy, said
the tribunal's report, sig tried to blackmail three other britons for
black-marketing, got at least two members of other western embassies
involved in homosexual activities ; all these victims were hustled
home by their governments after refusing to spy for him . sig also
tried his best to seduce a female secretary in the british embassy, but
she guessed his aim and reported him . still sig stayed on . " the
manufacture of compromising situations, " concluded the judges' report
last week, " must be regarded as one of the regular instruments by
which the soviet secret service seeks to suborn and enlist british
agents who can furnish it with our state secrets . " thus was britain's
security system warned about soviet sigmunds . but would it ever get
wise to british veras ?
