kenya the return of burning spear in dazzling sunlight last
week, 30,000 singing, dancing africans gathered before nairobi's
ministry of works . a great roar went up as two solemn men emerged .
one was kenya's british governor malcolm macdonald . the other, wearing
his customary leather jacket and beaded beanie, was burly jomo ( "
burning spear " ) kenyatta, the man who served seven years in jail as
the convicted " manager " of the mau mau terrorists, and who only three
years ago was denounced by the previous governor as " the leader to
darkness and death . " lifted bible . as if to brush away the bitter
past, macdonald told the crowd that this was a " glad day in kenya's
history " and wished kenyatta ('every success in his task of leading
kenya forward to uhuru (freedom) . " kenyatta echoed the cry of uhuru,
then, lifting a bible high in his right hand, he took the oath of
office as prime minister of self-governing kenya . jomo kenyatta made
the giant step from prisoner to prime minister with the help of his
kanu (kenya african national union) party, which last week won a
landslide victory in kenya's national elections, capturing 66 of 117
seats in the house of representatives, and 19 of 41 seats in the senate
. kenyatta not only defeated ronald ngala's rival kadu (kenya african
democratic union) and paulngei's african peoples party, but also dealt
skillfully with the clever kanu rivals below him who have been hoping
to be named as kenyatta's heir apparent . they are tom mboya, 32, the
bright, able and ruthless labor leader who leads a moderate faction
inside kanu, and communist-leaning oginga odinga, 52, who wears a blue
mao tse-tung-style workingman's uniform . kenyatta moved promptly to
secure a proper balance in his new administration, handed almost equal
cabinet posts to the two contenders : mboya was named minister of
justice and constitutional affairs, and odinga was given the
potentially powerful home affairs ministry . against all predictions,
kenyatta named no one at all as vice premier . no congo . kenyatta has
mellowed with age, imprisonment, and repeated marriages (he has had
four wives, three of whom survive, as do seven children and four
grandchildren) . in nairobi last week he said flatly : " kenya is not
going to be another congo . " as for the future of the 55,000 whites
living nervously among kenya's 8,000,000 africans, kenyatta says that
the white man " will be protected as any other citizen in kenya is
protected . he will have the right to own property . he will be equal
to every other citizen . " under the compromise constitution worked out
last year in london, britain was to retain control of defense, foreign
affairs and internal security . but last week, presumably impressed by
kenyatta's moderate words, britain's macdonald disclosed that all three
would be transferred to the new government, and complete independence
may well be won by the first of the year . a high british official in
nairobi expressed guarded optimism : " it's much more promising than i
expected . more and more european settlers have decided to remain in
kenya, and i think their view is justified . of course, tribalism could
muck it all up . but with a little luck, i think kenya can gradually
crawl forward . /
