red china turning the screw he was an obscure truck driver until
he was killed in an accident last august, but today lei feng is red
china's newest folk hero . otherwise celebrated as the forever
rustproof screw, young communist lei feng soared to posthumous fame
when party officials conveniently discovered a200,000-word diary that
established him as the confucius of collectivism . by contrast with the
vast majority of china's peasants, whose reluctance to be herded into
agricultural communes in 1958 has been largely responsible for the
nation's persistent food shortages, lei feng actually waxed lyrical
over such selfless, soulless " service to the people . " said he : "
one's role in the revolutionary cause is just like a screw in the
machine . a man has his greatest strength only when he is merged with
the collective . " with a marked improvement in food supplies this
spring, the government has mounted a massive " learn from lei feng "
propaganda campaign, in an effort to halt what ideologists call the
peasants' " spontaneous tendency toward capitalism . " to the dismay of
enterprising peasants, the government started cutting down on the
minute private plots that they have been allowed to cultivate and to
use as a source of independent income . it seemed illogical, since it
was the incentive that helped boost farm production in the first place
. nevertheless, in kiangsi province, radio nanchang exhorts daily : "
the collective must come before private plots . " at a commune in
kwangtung province, where peasants used to have to supply the
collective with 33 lbs . of human ordure a month, their quota has been
boosted to 55 lbs., thus limiting the only fertilizer available for
freelance farming . as an added turn of the screw, production quotas
for collective output have been sharply increased, in hopes that the
peasants will have to spend more time working for mao tse-tung and less
for tsu-fa, meaning " self-prosperity . " the government campaign may
well fizzle, as it did in 1958 . says one expert on china's agriculture
: " in the debris of the great leap forward, compulsion cannot work .
all that is left is persuasion . " most peasants are convinced
nonetheless that they are in for a far more rigorous existence ; many
each week are still fleeing the mainland . in macao, where he sought
refuge after swimming six hours across the pearl river delta, a
handsome, huskylooking youth from kwangtung province shrugged last week
: " what can you do ? how can you move ? it's like a heavy stone
crushing you . /
