morocco a king's headache high in a snow-swathed cedar grove in
the atlas mountains, the young king of morocco stood casting alone for
trout in an icy stream . hassan ii enjoyed good luck, which was not
surprising since no one else was allowed to fish the well-stocked
reserve at the royal resort of ifrane . nor were there any messy chores
. no sooner would the king hook another prize than five servants rushed
to remove the wriggling catch from the royal line . but for all the
outward calm that marked his vacation last week, morocco's 33-year-old
monarch had problems on his mind . they had to do with the outcome
three weeks ago of the nation's first legislative election in seven
years of independence . hassan had been proud to take this cautious
step toward democracy, but he had also been confident that his own
royal party, the f.d.c.i., would win an overwhelming majority of seats
of the 144-member house of representatives . things did not work out as
planned . semiofficial results last week confirmed that hassan's party
had won only 69 seats, four short of a majority . moreover, seven of
nine cabinet ministers running for the house under the king's banner
lost their races, and the two opposition parties, the nationalist
istiqlal and the left-leaning national union of popular forces, showed
startling strength, winning 43 and 28 seats respectively . if they
ganged up in a coalition, the two groups might be able to control the
house . steamed up by their new prestige, opposition leaders were
already demanding that the king's present rubber-stamp cabinet be
dissolved and boldly accusing the government of fraud at the polls .
istiqlal politicians even went around to the u.s . embassy complaining
that f.d.c.i . had bought votes with u.s . gift wheat . hassan had some
alternatives, none of them very pleasant : he could make his own
coalition with one of the opposition parties, a solution difficult to
achieve without losing royal face . or he could declare a " recount "
of votes and rig the results, a course repugnant to the idealistic
monarch . using the constitution he drafted last year, hassan could
even dissolve the house and forget about the democracy he had promised
the nation . wrestling with his dilemma, the king got little sympathy
from the opposition . jeered national union leader abderrakim benabid
: " it is impossible to play at democrat and dictator at the same time
