israel visitor's welcome two years ago, west germany's defense
minister franz josef strauss ordered a consignment of israeli-made
submachine guns for the bundeswehr, and the israeli government was so
grateful for the arms order that it invited strauss down for a visit .
the invitation gathered dust until strauss, who is now out of the
government, decided recently that the trip to israel might not hurt his
chances of making a political comeback at home . delighted to have you,
said israel's prime minister david ben-gurion . most israeli citizens
agreed with bengurion . nonetheless, anti-german feeling still runs
deep in israel, and a noisy minority led by the right-wing herut party
and the communists decided to vent it on strauss . they urged the
knesset, israel's parliament, to cancel the visit and declare that
strauss was unwelcome . when the knesset refused, street demonstrations
broke out in haifa, jerusalem and tel aviv . but ben-gurion stood firm
. when strauss landed at tel aviv a day late, in hopes of avoiding a
scene his plane was surrounded by scores of police ; three bodyguards
were posted outside his hotel room . the bavarian took the commotion in
stride . after all, he admitted, " the past lies like a shadow between
our two countries . " soon after he arrived, a lawyer for the israeli
communist party filed a complaint demanding the german's arrest for war
crimes allegedly committed when strauss was a young lieutenant and
battery commander at a german antiaircraft school near the end of world
war ii . strauss retorted that he had never been in charge of a
concentration camp . " i have a clear record and a clean conscience, "
he said . after paying calls on government officials, strauss toured
holy land historical sites, spent one night at a kibbutz (cooperative
farm) . en route, he promised to press for the establishment of
diplomatic relations between west germany and israel, and to try to bar
west german scientists from working for israel's archenemy, egypt .
before ending his ten-day stay this week, strauss was also to get a vip
tour of israeli defense installations . in the less populated areas,
feeling was not running so high . in any case, declared ben-gurion,
rebuking the demonstrators, " the jewish people will not accept
hitler's racist theory that a man is tainted because he belongs to a
certain people . /
