great
britain 2 on the fence with mlf field marshal viscount montgomery of
alamein has his own ideas about the u.s . proposal for a nato fleet of
polaris-firing surface ships manned by crews of several nationalities .
/ utter and complete poppycock ! " he cried in the house of lords
last week . " how, " he snorted, " can a ship fight effectively if
one-third of its crew is portuguese, one-third belgian and one-third,
say, danish .? the thing is just not on . you might as well man a
ship with a party of politicians . " many british politicians and
military experts share montgomery's mistrust of the multilateral force
(mlf) and its sponsor the u.s . indeed, though prime minister harold
macmillan nominally agreed at nassau last december to support the nato
force, his government has been hoping ever since that mlf would quietly
capsize of its own complexity . naughty questions . the british approve
of its primary aim, to satisfy west germany's demand for a bigger role
in nato's nuclear defense, but argue that they cannot afford to build
their own independent polaris submarine fleet and contribute as well to
mlf, whose 20 to 25 ships are expected to cost $5 billion over a
ten-year period . thanks to washington's success in selling mlf to
germany and then to italy, it seemed at first as if the fleet might be
built with only a token contribution from britain . however, when aldo
moro took over as italy's premier-designate last month, washington
realized that his fragile government is in no position to honor its
commitment to shoulder mlf's cost, or even to participate . thus the
u.s ., which has promised to contribute 40 per cent, and persuaded
the germans to pledge another 40 per cent , has finally put pressure on
britain . to whitehall's dismay, washington announced its top mlf
expert, admiral claude ricketts, deputy chief of naval operations,
would fly to london this week to discuss the government's technical
reservations and satisfy british complaints that they have so far
received nothing but " computer answers " from the pentagon . said one
british official gleefully : " we've got a lot of naughty questions .
/ compelling logic . britain's main objection to mlf is that it is
primarily a " political " scheme to promote nato solidarity . however,
if britain decides not to support mlf, it faces one of two unpalatable
alternatives . either the project will be abandoned, with the
likelihood that the germans and other european nations will ultimately
develop their own nuclear weapons ; or the force will come into being
anyway, and in time may develop into a truly european deterrent,
exclusive of britain . in either case, britain might seriously strain
its ties with the u.s . by refusing to participate . recalling that
only a few years ago the government argued with compelling logic
against membership in the common market, the sunday telegraph concluded
last week : " what is so sad is that once again we seem to be climbing
reluctantly into a back seat on the bandwagon only after it has started
to move . /
