great britain lots of loot in british movies, crime usually pays
handsomely at least if the crook is a dear old crank whose only motive
is to raise some lolly for the league against cruel sports . in real
life, larceny is even more lucrative for the professional who
specializes in the sophisticated jobs that the english call "
yankee-style " crime . robberies alone have soared by more than 200 per
cent (to some $5,000,000 yearly) in metropolitan london over the past
decade, while payroll thefts have gone up almost 500 per cent since
1960 . chief reason for the increase in " snatchings and rakings, " as
scotland yard calls them, is that the underworld is now managed by
executives with a flair for organization that outstrips the sleuths .
they also have style . in the past year one gang has made frequent
headlines by knowledgeable thefts of priceless silver from stately
homes, whose doughty walls, it seems, scarcely quiver when burglars
blast open the pantry safe . one victim, the marquess of bristol,
learned recently that $56,000 worth of silver pinched from his mansion
last february is now in russia . another underworld spectacular that
fascinated britons was carried out last year by eight dapper dastards
in bowler hats, and dark suits and carrying tightly furled umbrellas,
who marched into london airport, grabbed a $175,000 airline payroll,
and beat an elegant retreat in two matching blue jaguars . last week
britons could talk of little else but a cool little coup in which four
men swiped a half-ton of gold from a financial-district bullion
warehouse in the lunch hour . after tying up a watchman, the villains
nonchalantly lugged forty 27-lb . gold bars worth $560,000 across a
sidewalk into a blue delivery van, then made a clean getaway despite a
traffic-stopping dash the wrong way on a one-way street . hoping to
keep the culprits from leaving the country, scotland yard posted men at
every airfield and seaport in britain . flying-squad officers checked
every small foundry in london on the off-chance that they might nab the
gang in the act of melting their haul into easily portable nuggets . at
week's end the new lavender hill mob, as fleet street inevitably
christened it, was still at large probably, guessed scotland yard,
holed up within metropolitan london . unlike alec guinness' mob, which
melted down its loot into sold-gold eiffel tower souvenirs and shipped
them to paris, the real-life quartet probably aimed to export its
bullion to india, where gold fetches twice the world market price . " i
see no reason why they should be caught, " said one expert . " they
have a market for it all ready . it's that kind of job . /
