france warning to les flics to foreign tourists, the paris cop
seems a model of quiet courtesy . he directs them to american express
and thomas cook with a debonair salute ; he guides gladiatorial
traffic with a calm nonchalance . frenchmen look on le flic quite
differently . apart from their dislike of taking orders from anyone,
they know that frequently in the hem of his natty blue cape is sewn
enough buckshot to break a man's and sometimes a woman's nose . they
have seen him wading into a crowd flailing a 6-ft . riot cane like a
scythe . parisians recall many bloody heads across the years,
especially the nine people killed in the crush when police broke up a
1962 peace rally . but the latest uproar began in april, when
cinemactor jean-paul (breathless) belmondo dared to protest that a cop
was neglecting an accident victim while quizzing witnesses ; belmondo
was knocked flat . during may, four prisoners detained for trifling
offenses hanged themselves in their cells . there was no evidence to
prove that the police were at fault, but no one could convince
suspicious frenchmen that the deaths were not caused by third-degree
tactics . paris has also gotten a little tired of the overzealous use
of submachine guns issued during the past algerian terrorist outbreaks
. when a panther escaped from a circus, a flic mistook a shadow for the
beast and in error plugged a passer-by . another ludicrously chopped up
a cow, broken loose from a slaughterhouse, with his tommy gun . with
newspaper headlines growing ever more critical, public animosity became
so great that four flics were beaten up recently . concerned, interior
minister roger frey last week called top police officials together and
spoke some harsh words . he told them " to orient their essential
activities toward their traditional job . " / your action will
contribute most to the public peace, " frey upbraided them, " when it
is carried out with humanity, sang-froid, tact and courtesy, with
unrelenting care for the respect of human beings . this requires not a
little urbanity in relations with the public . " whether the cops
really cared to improve their public image was open to question ; the
tradition of stern authoritarianism is deeply rooted . the paris force
dates back to the days of augustus caesar and assumes the role of a
state, rather than municipal, police . until the recent criticism, they
could hold a suspect up to two weeks without explanation . they still
issue passports, license everything from prostitution to driving, and
keep close track of the whereabouts of everybody in paris . will the
oldest constabulary in the western world mend its ways ? one man on a
beat had a plain reply : " toi, mele toi de tes oignons (mind your own
onions) . /
