the congo the india-rubber man just after sunup one day last week,
secessionist moise tshombe slipped out of his pink palace in
elisabethville, climbed into the back seat of a black comet sedan, and
sped off down the road toward the northern rhodesian border . soon an
armored column of 500 united nations troops was on his tail . for a
moment, it looked as if the u.n . were in hot pursuit of its old foe .
but no ! to the astonishment of bug-eyed natives along the way, moise
was actually leading the blue helmets, urging his own tattered
katangese gendarmes to lay down their arms so the u.n . could reopen
vital rail and road links . bizarre as it was, the incident was an
accurate indicator of the way things actually were going last week in
the congo's copper-rich katanga province, where the u.n . was waging
war with tshombe's breakaway regime for the third time since september
1961 . in two weeks, the tough u.n . troops had seized a steadily
lengthening ribbon of rail lines and nearly every major population
center in the province . only the western copper town of kolwezi
remained in katanga's grip ; it was defended by 2,000 boozy gendarmes,
100 of tshombe's white mercenaries, and a smashing blonde ambulance
driver known as " madame yvette, " who sauntered about in paratroop
boots, camouflage uniform, bush hat and shoulder holster . only 50
miles from kolwezi, indian infantrymen probed cautiously forward,
waiting only for the signal to head full blast toward the town . but
the signal would not be given rashly, for the ragtag mercenaries
threatened to blow up a huge dam and industrial installations, leaving
the town a blackened shell . they might not be bluffing . " i am back .
/ but with full backing from the u.s . and the afro-asian nations, the
u.n . was determined to dictate a
settlement to tshombe and make it stick . if
it fails, the rest of the congo, starved of the riches that enable
katanga to account for 65 per cent of the country's exports, could
splinter into a score of warring tribal domains . already a corps of
100 central government functionaries was flying into elisabethville to
take charge of katanga's administration . the big question mark, as
usual, was the slippery tshombe . as the week began, he was holed up
defiantly in kolwezi with the mercenaries . there were rumors that he
might flee to europe rather than give in to the u.n . but he was not
surrendering katanga's top job . lo and behold, he was back in
elisabethville . " in spite of all the trouble and bloodshed, " he
declared with macarthurian grandeur, " i am back . " what policy would
he follow ? no one could say, for before long he was bouncing wildly
from one position to another . " pure india rubber, " marveled a
foreign diplomat . lump of sugar . in the space of three days, tshombe
1) promised to " abstain from making any declarations against the u.n .
/ ; 2) immediately broke his promise by threatening " a scorched-earth
policy " in kolwezi (see world business) ; 3) was clapped under house
arrest by infuriated u.n . officials " to restrain him from further
irresponsible acts " ; and 4) got his house arrest commuted to a
nighttime curfew by leading the u.n . troops to the rhodesian border .
then, having baffled everybody, he vanished once more from the capital.
with tshombe's katanga now largely under u.n . control, central
government premier cyrille adoula began flexing his muscles in
leopoldville . he demanded
that the british and belgian
consuls in elisabethville leave the country because they had acted as
mediators for tshombe in hopes of arranging a cease-fire . he spurned a
$2,000,000 gift from the british government because of its " subversive
policy " on katanga, and one of his officials sniffed : " we are not a
little child who can be given a lump of sugar to keep quiet . " box
score . exuberant as adoula was over tshombe's plight, there was not
much for him to crow about . even if katanga is successfully
reintegrated, he will still face the equally formidable problems of
administrative incompetence, official corruption, army indiscipline and
worst of all rivalries among the congo's 200 tribes . the point was
underlined in blood last week in kasai province, where feuding
tribesmen were at one another's throats over a border dispute . natives
kidnaped and reportedly ate two belgian lumbermen, then began
slaughtering one another in the town of kakenge . such gruesome
incidents no longer surprised anyone . a leopoldville newspaper
reported the event as matter-of-factly as if it were a baseball box
score . its headline : killed at kakenge 370 luluas, two belgians, one
musonge, one kanyoka .
