russia meet comrade punkovsky there was no applause from the
crowd that jammed a tennis court in southwest moscow's luzhniki sports
grounds . in the biggest trial of its kind ever held in the soviet
capital, 2,000 muscovites met at the stadium as a people's court to
pass judgment on three " young, healthy fellows " who were accused of
having " wasted their youth " on drunken sprees, gambling, and black
market dealings with foreigners . after the citizens voted unanimously
to banish the wastrels from moscow, all three were sentenced to five
years' hard labor in what the authorities delicately called " a remote
part of the country . " the trial, which was front-page news in pravda,
was staged as part of a new soviet campaign to make life harder for
western spies and duller for communist partygoers . since last month's
trial and execution of oleg penkovsky, the scientific official who was
convicted of slipping secret information to british and u.s . agents,
the soviet press has been urging comrades to " break the criminal chain
of espionage " by showing " revolutionary vigilance and being
ideologically well-steeled . " russians were particularly warned
against moscow's diplomatic cocktail circuit, where, said pravda
darkly, western spymasters recruit new talent . warned pravda : " that
was how they got hold of penkovsky, and the same thing may happen to
anyone who, in his blindness, nibbles at the bait the imperialists so
lavishly toss out . " izvestia chimed in with an acid-etched portrait
of the kind of comrade the imperialists are looking for . dubbing him "
punkovsky " for punk izvestia reported that this unsavory type
cherishes a neverending stream of gold-embossed invitations to
diplomatic receptions, where he can be spotted by his " empty phrases
and full glass . " he is the sort of man who, when benny goodman visits
moscow, carries his clarinet case . those old pants he wears so proudly
were bestowed on him by a british traveling salesman . " give me a tie
and some socks, " punkovsky tells a western cultural attache, " and
i'll introduce you to some of moscow's angry young men . " the soviet
people are not inclined to see a spy in every foreigner, " officials
insisted . nonetheless, they warned, if foreign diplomats and newsmen
continue to invite punkovskys and penkovskys to their parties, " real,
honest soviet people " might boycott them altogether . to show that its
diatribes were not just cocktail talk, the government last week
stripped artillery chief marshal sergei varenstov of his rank for
having befriended penkovsky, disciplined some of " the scientist's
other friends and boozing companions . " / of course, " added pravda, "
we are against spy mania . /
