belgium 2-12 lingua belgica in charleroi, the walloon banners screamed
/ no to a flemish dictatorship ! " an orator in flanders shouted, "
we reject all further compromises ! " the angry shouts over much of
belgium last week were the latest outbursts in the ancient hostility
between the nation's 5,250,000 dutch-speaking flemings in the north and
the 4,000,000 french-speaking walloons in the south . since belgium
seceded from the netherlands 133 years ago, the numerically superior
flemings have always resented the traditional economic and social
superiority of the walloons . " we're the only country in europe with
an oppressed majority, " says belgium's flemish premier theo lefevre .
lefevre was overstating the case . since the end of world war ii,
flanders has capitalized on a healthy dollop of u.s . aid to
industrialize and acquire a patina of prosperity, while wallonia, with
its played-out coal mines, has been plagued by chronic
unemployment.last year, when violent riots broke out between the two
factions, the flemish majority in parliament passed a law dividing
belgium into two separate unilingual sections along a line extending
from the german border south of aachen to the french frontier ; to the
north, flemish would be the official language in schools, courts and
administrative offices ; to the south, only french would be recognized
. the compromise was a failure, and last week demonstrations broke out
in brussels and louvain, both of which are north of the line and both
of which have always been accorded a measure of bilingual status . at
louvain university, walloon professors and students went out on strike,
boycotting lectures and classes in protest over the proposed bilingual
split of the traditionally french-speaking university . in an attempt
to solve the explosive situation, premier lefevre called for a two-week
/ language armistice " while his government tried to work out another
compromise . but with parliament split along language lines, there was
little hope of a solution . unless flemings and walloons learn to live
with each other, said one deputy in parliament last week, " i can only
conclude that in a small country live small people . /
