great britain the price of christine what the hell is
going on in this country ? shouted the daily mirror . as if anyone
didn't know . what went on was just the kind of story on which the
mirror thrives . although it had started out
merely as venery in high (and
several low) places, it grew into a major scandal that not only smashed
the career of a promising tory politician, but also raised some
troubling questions about british security and rocked the macmillan
government . otherwise, it read like la dolce vita, anglo-saxon style .
the story first emerged partially last march, when its leading
characters became publicly identified : red-haired christine keeler,
who came from middlesex to sling hash at 17, and at 21 was the west
end's most-called girl ; john profumo, 48, the able war minister and
man-about-mayfair, whose virile charm proved something of a tory asset
after those homosexual spy scandals ,; and dr . stephen ward, 43, a
social osteopath (and son of the anglican canon of rochester
cathedral), who said he liked helping attractive girls of humble birth
adapt to " the needs and stresses of modern living . " after months of
rumor, a labor m.p . challenged the government to deny the rumors of a
minister's indiscretions with christine . profumo's firm denial of
wrongdoing, and a demonstration of support from prime minister
macmillan, quashed the story temporarily until it burst forth again
last week . this time profumo resigned from the government after an
abrupt, abject confession that he had previously lied to the prime
minister, his colleagues and the house of commons . coexistence . of
noble italian descent, john dennis profumo had every qualification to
reach the tories' top ranks : harrow and oxford, fine war record,
brains, drive, and a beautiful wife, movie actress valerie (great
expectations) hobson . together, the profumos were weekending at
cliveden, famed country estate of lord and lady astor, when they were
introduced to christine in 1961 . also present : stephen ward, who had
a cottage on the place . thereafter, valerie stayed home while jack
visited christine at ward's flat in wimpole mews . what the war
minister never knew was that christine had another regular visitor,
evgeny ivanov, who was a soviet naval attache in london . a round-eyed
observer of their coexistence was nymphet marilyn ( " mandy " )
rice-davies, a well-developed 16-year-old, who was one of christine's
intimates . " the farcical thing about it all, " as mandy told the
press, " was that, on more than one occasion, as jack left christine at
the flat, ivanov walked in . " it possibly seemed less hilarious to
british mi-5 intelligence agents, who were shadowing ivanov at the
time, to find that their war minister was unwittingly sharing a bed
with a suspected soviet spy .
the price of christine though they tried not to be seen in
public, profumo sometimes took christine for drives, she later recalled
. " he showed me the war office, where he worked . he even showed me
downing street . " but in time profumo stopped seeing christine
because, she explained, he was " scared it would ruin his career . "
comrade ivanov was shipped off to moscow, and the " model " from
middlesex, who had acquired a taste for jazz on the way up, hit the
blues belt and acquired a jamaican lover named johnnie edgecombe . but
he could never understand what her telephone was for . " he seemed to
think, " christine complained later, " that i was going to live with
him forever . " one day, johnnie showed up with a gun and fired several
bullets into the door before the bobbies bagged him . multiracialism .
after johnnie went to jail, there was another west indian lover,
aloysius " lucky " gordon, who, if anything, was even more narrowminded
. in april he beat her up . last week, at his trial for assault,
aloysius was so ungallant as to testify that he had kept her supplied
with marijuana, while all she gave him in return was vd . " you can say
this for christine, " said a leading labor politician . " at least
she's multiracial . " the scandal might have died, had it not been
resurrected by stephen ward himself . seven weeks after profumo's
denial, he told the prime minister's private secretary that the war
minister had lied in commons, that he had indeed had an affair with
christine keeler . ward repeated his charges in letters to home
secretary henry brooke and labor party leader harold wilson . profumo
was confronted with this new accusation, but it was not until last week
that he startled tory officials by blurting the truth about christine
in a letter to the vacationing prime minister, profumo resigned as
war minister and as m.p . for stratford-on-avon, confessing his " grave
misdemeanor . " said he : " i cannot tell you of my deep remorse . "
macmillan accepted his resignation, describing the affair as " a great
tragedy . " then profumo and his wife left their regent's park home and
disappeared into the country . dilemma . the scandal he left behind got
livelier every day . christine keeler, who was back from a continental
holiday and suddenly sported a " business manager " and a new
rolls-royce, added more off-color to the saga by telling and selling
her story to the papers . " i was very fond of jack, " she said
wistfully . " if ever we meet again, we have at least this in common
both our careers have been ruined . " mandy chimed in with details of
the high living that had earned her a jaguar, mink and diamonds by her
17th birthday . at one dinner party, she recalled, " a naked man
wearing a mask waited on table like a slave . he had to have a mask
because he was so well known . /
meanwhile stephen ward's explanations filled the newspapers and tv
screens . the affair, he protested, had given rise to " a whole train
of rumors, and all sorts of people were mentioned, with the implication
that i'd been trying to procure them for miss keeler . " despite his
subsequent attempt to protect profumo and the government, said ward, he
had reported profumo's liaison to british intelligence when it was at
its height in 1961 . said he : " i've almost had a nervous breakdown .
it's a terrible dilemma . one didn't want to bitch up anybody . you owe
it to your friends . but i must clear myself . " for the immediate
future, stephen ward will do his explaining in court . at week's end
scotland yard plucked the osteopath from his white jaguar sports car
and jailed him on charges of violating britain's sexual offenses act by
/ living wholly or in part on the earnings of prostitution . " unrest .
as a matter of political tactics, the labor party decided to treat the
profumo affair not so much as a moral indictment of uppercrust britain
but rather as another flagrant example of the erratic workings of
britain's security system . if, argued laborites, british intelligence
had known all along that britain's war minister had shared a call girl
with a soviet agent, why was nothing done to break up a liaison that
might expose him to russian blackmail ? was macmillan told ? if so,
had the government encouraged profumo to lie about his dalliance with
christine keeler solely in order to avert a damaging scandal ?
unflappable harold macmillan, who did not allow last week's events to
interrupt his golfing vacation, will be able to present the
government's case when parliament reconvenes next week . he may yet, as
in the past, confound his critics in commons . but the affair may
seriously affect the tories' already shaky chances at the next
elections, which macmillan will now probably try to delay . said tory
backbencher lord lambton : " the harm this will do to the conservative
party will be enormous . there has been for some time a general feeling
of unrest in this country as to the morality of the present government
. this feeling will be immensely increased . /
