the allies three on a horse top british defense officials
listened politely in london last week while a u.s . navy task force
argued the merits of a missile-firing surface fleet manned by mixed
nato crews . the britons' real feelings toward the multilateral force
(mlf) were best expressed in a sardonic limerick that made the rounds
of whitehall : hooray for the multimixed force, german, british and
yankee, of course ! each produces a knight, and the plan is to fight
or deter with all three on one horse . behind u.s . efforts to sell mlf
was the ill-concealed fact that military washington does not really
believe in it either . privately the pentagon considers it at best a
gimmick to postpone " proliferation " of independent nuclear forces to
other nations, which it wants at all costs to prevent or delay . "
monstrous nonsense . " charged with the halfhearted mission of winning
british support for the $5 billion mlf was admiral claude ricketts, u.s
. deputy chief of naval operations, who has doubled of late as the
pentagon's multimixmaster . strategically, he argued, a force of 25
polaris vessels cruising europe's shallow coastal waters could not
easily be destroyed by soviet submarines or aircraft . said ricketts :
/ each additional weapons system enhances the credibility of other
systems " but r.a.f . marshal sir john slessor called it " monstrous
military nonsense, " and many other british defense officials agreed .
the state department's main justification for mlf is not military but
political . it is aimed primarily at satisfying west germany's demand
for an equal voice with britain and france in nato's nuclear councils,
and the germans are already pledged to match the u.s.'s offer to
shoulder 40 per cent of the cost . without british backing, however,
mlf will never get off the drawing board ; the u.s . is not willing to
share the financial and political responsibility with germany alone .
but the british, who are already committed to building a $1 billion
polaris submarine fleet by 1970, reply that they cannot afford to pour
more money into anything as theoretical as mlf . europe's most telling
objection to the project is that even if the allies did chip in,
ultimate control of its weapons would still rest with the u.s . who
needs it ? the kennedy administration hopes nonetheless to win
british as well as german support for the force . " we certainly don't
need it, " explained a high-ranking administration official last week,
/ nor do the europeans . but if it satisfies them, i think it is worth
pursuing . if it doesn't, well, at least we made the offer . " all this
merely obscured what ought to be the real u.s . policy an independent
nuclear force for a truly united europe ; 2) full u.s . responsibility
for the defense of europe until that goal is achieved .
