austria herr doktor he is short, balding and middle-aged .
he has a wife and six children and lives in a sprawling suburban house
outside munich . he is a lecturer and journalist who wrote his doctoral
thesis in social science on agriculture in the tyrol . but when the way
was legally cleared for his return to his homeland for the first time
in 44 years, austria's long-established coalition government trembled
last week . for the mustached herr doktor is franz joseph otto ruprecht
maria anton karl maximilian heinrich sixtus xaver felix renatus ludwig
gaetan pius ignaz, archduke otto von habsburg, pretender to the
austrian throne . socialist leaders called otto's projected return a "
provocation " that threatened austria's precarious neutral position as
a buffer between east and west . electrical workers went on a wildcat
strike, plunging one vienna district into darkness . left-wing papers
roared against " foreign and domestic reactionaries, " and socialist
political bosses threatened to pull out of their coalition with the
conservative people's party . industrious ants . otto was five when
austria rebelled against the habsburg monarchy and overthrew his
father, emperor karl, in the aftermath of world war i . the new
republican government exiled the royal family and passed a " habsburg
law, " which banned their return to austrian soil until they renounced
all claims to the throne and formally embraced the democratic
constitution . karl regally refused, and after his death in 1922 the
royal family settled in spain, where the empress zita set up a modest
court . zita insisted that otto be accorded the full privileges of his
rank, rose and curtsied when he entered a room, and called him " your
imperial highness . " a thoughtful, scholarly youth, otto studied at
belgium's louvain university, by his serious demeanor stood off
phalanxes of eligible european princesses . when one young, attractive
hungarian countess came to pay homage, otto strolled silently with her
for some minutes in his garden until he suddenly asked : " have you
ever thought how industrious ants are ? " finally in 1951, at 38, he
married germany's princess regina of saxemeiningen . settling outside
munich in the village of pocking, otto traveled often to spain, where
he was honorary president of the franco-backed european documentation
and information center, an organization founded in 1952 to bring
politically isolated spain into closer relations with the rest of
europe . his membership in this society and his friendship with franco
convinced austrian socialists that his ultimate aim was the
re-establishment of an autocratic monarchy in austria . " the idea
matters . " in his writing and lectures, otto sounded far from
autocratic, sought to define " monarchy's place in the atomic age . "
said he : " the new form of monarchy might well be elective from the
judiciary, perhaps . its primary duty would be the maintenance of the
rule of law . it is the idea that matters, not the people who once were
kings . " but otto had little sympathy with the leveling influences of
socialism . " we have arrived at a bureaucracy of welfare and insurance
against everything, which may well turn reason into nonsense, " he
wrote . " there is a danger of a new caste arising out of a classless
society those in power . " two years ago, otto suddenly announced his
willingness to abide by the provisions of the habsburg law and sought
to re-enter austria . but austria's coalition government, balanced
between the 81 parliamentary seats held by the conservative people's
party and the 76 seats held by the socialists, refused to act on the
petition in the face of vehement socialist protests that otto's
political ideas were " fantastic " and that his declaration of loyalty
was inadequate . otto's attorney took the case to the administrative
court, which fortnight ago upheld the legality of his declaration over
the government's rejection . pushbutton . the people's party, while far
from eager to see otto back home, was willing to abide by the court
ruling . not so the socialists . " this court has replaced the
parliamentary organ, " said socialist foreign minister bruno kreisky .
socialist leaders hinted a nationwide rail and electrical strike if
otto tried to cross the border into austria . " all we have to do, "
said kreisky, " is push a button . " in parliament, the socialists
joined with the eight-man delegation of the splinter right-wing liberal
party and forced a resolution demanding that the government prepare a
bill that could return ultimate judgment on all habsburg law cases to
parliament . the liberals lent their support to the socialists,
however, only on the condition that the bill not be retroactive and
that otto would not be barred from returning home. the crisis
imperiled the 18-year coalition between the people's party and the
socialists, who kept threatening to freeze out their old partners by
forming a new coalition with the liberals . even if the old coalition
survives, the betting was that enough trouble had been stirred up to
require new national elections soon . while most austrians retain
mellow feelings toward the habsburgs, they would just as soon not be
bothered by otto's problem . " why should we go back to where we
finished 40 years ago ? " asked helmut qualtinger, famed vienna
cabaret satirist . " i think that as a matter of taste, otto would not
want to come back not if he loves his country . /
also unsettled is
the question of the habsburg fortune in austria, which amounts to some
$30 million, mostly in estates . the lands are now held in trusteeship
by the austrian republic .
