south viet nam 2-12 the religious crisis a dusk-to-dawn curfew emptied
the streets of the ancient vietnamese capital of hue, 400 miles north
of saigon . riot police and armored personnel carriers patrolled the
dark and deserted city . roadblocks were set up on the outskirts, and
barbed-wire barricades encircled the sacred tudam pagoda . these
government security measures were not a precaution against an attack by
communist guerrillas ; they were taken to quell demonstrations by
hue's buddhist population against the regime of roman catholic
president ngo dinh diem . while all the world's attention was focused
on south viet nam's bitter struggle against the reds, the country was
divided by a religious conflict that might imperil the entire course of
the war against the viet cong . morality crusade . south viet nam's
buddhists, who comprise 80 per cent of the country's 15 million
people, are bitter over alleged favoritism by diem and his catholic
ruling family toward the nation's 1,500,000 catholics . the buddhists
have long complained that the government gives catholics the best civil
service jobs and that diem, because he feels that catholics are more
solidly anticommunist, promotes them to higher positions in the army .
many young vietnamese army officers, claim buddhist leaders, have
become converts to catholicism to win official favor . " but if the
viet cong ever come through the barbed wire, " said one u.s . officer
of his recently converted vietnamese counterpart, " i have a feeling
he'll do his praying to buddha . " buddhists feel that diem's
government is trying to make catholicism the official state religion,
point to the morality crusade of diem's militantly catholic
sister-in-law, mme . ngo dinh nhu . in sharp variance with the easy
social mores of most south vietnamese, mme . nhu has banned abortion,
adultery, polygamy, concubinage, divorce (except by presidential
dispensation), and the sale of contraceptives . diem indiganntly
replied that buddhist leaders are " damned fools " to think that he is
trying to suppress their religion . " i don't forget, " he says, " that
80 per cent of the votes that elected me president were buddhist votes
. " catholics maintain that they occupy so many influential posts only
because their church schools turn out far better educated graduates
than buddhist schools . in a sharply worded statement, mme . nhu
challenged the good faith of striking bonzes (monks) . " the robe does
not make the bonze, " said mme . nhu . " it is necessary to examine
very closely the comportment of certain so-called buddhist monks who
continue to make not only inconsiderate but false remarks and overtly
assume an attitude incompatible with their presumed state of holy men .
/ protest strike . the situation came to a head last month in hue (pop
. 106,000), which happens to be the see of diem's brother, archbishop
ngo dinh thuc . though catholics were allowed to fly vatican flags at a
church celebration honoring archbishop thuc, three days later the
government forbade the buddhists to unfurl their religious flags for
the 2,507th birthday of gautama buddha . when the buddhists staged a
protest march against the edict, government armored cars fired over the
heads of the rioters . in the melee, nine people were killed . the
buddhists blamed the slaughter on diem's troops ; the government
blamed the killings on communist agitators . the hue disaster caused
buddhist demonstrations throughout the country . buddhist delegations
in saigon demanded the removal of restrictions on their faith, equal
job opportunities and indemnity for the families of the dead and
wounded in hue . instead, the government arrested demonstrators, blamed
the unrest on " liars, foreigners and the viet cong . " when another
buddhist crowd gathered in hue last week, troops dispersed it with
crude tear-gas bombs that sent 67 people to the hospital with chemical
burns . u.s . officials in saigon fear that the mounting religious
strife can only benefit the viet cong by dividing the people and the
predominantly buddhist army just as the government forces are beginning
to gain a military advantage over the reds . diem made some
conciliatory gestures ; but with the situation fast deteriorating,
they might prove not to be enough he ordered the removal of the
barricades in
hue and in a nationwide radio broadcast admitted that some of his aides
had not shown " sufficient understanding and sensitivity " in dealing
with the crisis .
