africa third largest although africa is full of talk about
mergers and federations of new nations, often the unity schemes are no
more firm than maps drawn in the sand . but in kenya last week, a
serious, sensible and long-considered plan took shape . in nairobi,
newly elected prime minister jomo kenyatta presided over a meeting of
his neighbors . on one side sat uganda's prime minister milton apollo
obote, grinning cheerfully beneath his toothbrush mustache ; on the
other, tanganyika's high-spririted president julius nyerere . present
as an observer : somalia's foreign minister abdullahi issa . from
three hours of talk emerged the decision to work for a federation of
kenya, uganda, tanganyika and zanzibar, with somalia, rwanda and
burundi also invited . " we have a common history, culture and customs
which make our unity both logical and natural, " declared kenyatta,
thereby seeming to refute old charges that he was parochially
interested only in pushing the fortunes of his kikuyu tribe, the most
numerous in kenya . " we reject tribalism, racialism or inward-looking
policies . " the east african federation, which may be launched when
kenya gains full independence, probably later this year, could
eventually become a nation of 25 million people, the third largest in
africa . there is no clear notion yet as to who will run the federation
or how tight it will be, but a joint committee will spend the next two
months drafting a program for joint economic planning, the
establishment of common defense, foreign and diplomatic representation,
and a central bank . federation, said the three leaders, will create "
a formidable force and a vast market . " among many critical problems
facing the proposed federation are kenya's occasionally bloody dispute
with somalia, probable opposition from buganda's frederick mutesa ii (
/ king freddie " ), and resistance from kenya's 55,000 remaining
european settlers, who may be apprehensive of submersion in even more
millions of africans . but the federation scheme was off to a
remarkably resolute start . when a newsman in nairobi complimented
president nyerere on how quickly the plan had been launched, nyerere
smiled broadly . " what do you mean, quick ? " said he . " this is
something we've been thinking about for 40 years . /
