tourists business & pleasure on the road last week : bearded
beatnik poet allen (howl) ginsberg came briefly to rest in south viet
nam, to investigate the crisis between the government and the
rebellious buddhists (see south viet nam) . the saffron-robed monks at
first thought ginsberg either a " spy or madman " but after a poetry
reading one monk told him : " you are an enlightened one . maybe all
the people in the world are asleep except you . you are awake . "
awakened, ginsberg almost immediately left south viet nam, commenting,
/ this place depresses me . " guinea's president sekou toure, on the
way home from the pan-african summit conference in addis ababa, stopped
off in tanganyika . arriving 20 minutes early for a private dinner at
arusha's plush safari hotel at the foot of cloud-capped mount meru,
toure seemed miffed because 1) european and african guests relaxing in
the lobby did not " stand as a mark of respect to him, " 2) the hotel
was not decorated by either flowers or the national flag of tanganyika
and guinea . after the toure party stalked out, the tanganyikan
government closed down the hotel, evicting its 28 guests . explained an
african official : " we are very sensitive to no appreciation of our
dignity . " moise tshombe, president of katanga, hastily left his
capital of elisabethville when central government authorities picked up
several valises full of his personal papers, which had been cached in
the apartment of a belgian called mr . christian . among the items
prompting tshombe's sudden search for a healthier climate : documents
indicating that he has funds tucked away in 15 banks in 13 countries
ranging from switzerland to the u.s . to burundi . rada adzhubei, 34,
blonde, plump daughter of nikita khrushchev and wife of izvestia's
editor, turned up in cairo as guest of hoda, 16-year-old daughter of
egypt's president gamal abdel nasser . rada told newsmen : " my father
is in very good health and has no intention of resigning . " rada also
explained that, because communist ideology does not discriminate
between the sexes, " the day is not far off when we will send a woman
to the moon . /
