france warrior's rest for all his preoccupation with building the new
france, le grand charles is also his country's grand liseur, whose
voracious reading at least two hours of each day . on rising,
de gaulle skims through the morning press, after lunch he peruses le
monde, then he snatches a few chapters from a book . evenings, de
gaulle relaxes in a bedroom chair with more books . inundated by gift
copies, de gaulle leafs through every volume sent him, reads with care
those that seem promising . afterward he writes personal notes in
longhand to the author, length and warmth depending on his opinion of
the work (one of his highest compliments : " i congratulate myself for
having read your book " ) . in recent months de gaulle has polished
off, among others, francois d'harcourt's l'asie, reveil d'un monde,
dealing with the diversity of asian cultures ; edouard sablier's de
l'oural a l'atlantique, a dissertation on communist penetration ;
l'histoire secrete, a history of france from 1936 through the algerian
war ; and lagrandissement, an abstract novel by claude mauriac . for
light reading, de gaulle occasionally shows a penchant for the torrid .
the pro-gaullist weekly le nouveau candide raised parisian eyebrows
some time ago by reporting that de gaulle had read les pianos
mecaniques by henri-francois rey . a french bestseller highly praised
by the critics, pianos is a sort of dolce vita set on spain's costa
brava whose main characters a schizophrenic journalist, a neglected
teen-age boy and girl, a half-wit charwoman move through their
pointless lives battling boredom with promiscuity . sample passage : "
she led him to the bed, still keeping their lips locked . vincent lay
down . jenny detached herself . she began to undress him, with sure
clean motions . . . " it is just possible that the president did not
know what he was getting into when he started the book . once during a
lunch with friends, he asked one of the wives present : " what have
you been reading ? " answer : le repos de guerrier (the warrior's
rest) . apparently thinking it a military tome, the president said
eagerly : " ah, tres bien . could you lend it to me ? " actually,
the book, whose movie version starred brigitte bardot, was a sultry
item dealing more with conquests in the bedroom than on the battlefield
