great britain the time of the trollop " a great
party, " cried viscount hailsham on tv last week, " is not to be
brought down by a woman of easy virtue ! " but the possibility was
real enough . in the huse of commons this week, prime minister harold
macmillan would have to confront criticism from the laborites, plus
some barely suppressed dissent in his own party, of the way in which he
handled, or mishandled, the profumo scandal . in the long run, the
tories faced an even more elusive and insidious threat than
parliamentary attacks the facts in police dossiers and in the private
lives of people who personify conservative rule . a lie in the nude .
the week leading up to the debate in the commons consisted mostly of
talk but what talk . christine keeler, the cause of it all, was
strangely irrepressible and outwardly serene amid the tumbling of
facades and the crash of reputations . blossoming forth in ever more
dazzling photographs she became britain's fastest-rising fallen woman .
she was besieged by film and nightclub offers and incorporated herself
as christine keeler, ltd . she even landed, uncaptioned, on the cover
of the austere economist . as for her mentor, osteopath stephen ward,
he was in jail, bound for trial on charges of living on prostitutes'
earnings . the evidence, it was widely suspected, would prove damaging
to a great many people . although the labor party concentrated on the
security question, in public debate the profumo case inevitably turned
into a moral issue . significantly, the unpardonable crime of
ex-secretary of state for war john profumo was not that he was
indiscreet and a potential security risk, but that he lied to the house
of commons in initially denying any relationship with christine .
moreover, he lied stupidly, since he might have saved his dignity and
his seat as an m.p . by admitting his misstep . as a limerick that made
the rounds of westminster last week had it : " what on earth have you
done .? " said christine, " you have wrecked the whole party machine
. " to lie in the nude " is not at all rude, " but to lie in the house
is obscene . /
serialized sex . the labor party rallied for
battle with enthusiasm . returning from a week's visit to moscow and
pleasant if futile chats with khrushchev about disarmament, labor party
leader harold wilson hinted he would produce new evidence this week to
show that britain's security system was breached . he had good reason
for confidence : the daily mail's national opinion poll gave labor its
biggest lead ever : 69.2 per cent to 19.8 per cent over the tories .
on his return from a golfing vacation, macmillan's first objective was
to command a united cabinet . calling his ministers into emergency
session, he asked each man to outline privately his own view of the
situation . without exception, the 21 top tories expressed deep dismay
at the public's loss of confidence in the government . macmillan was
caught between two almost equally unpleasant possibilities . had he
known about profumo's doings, and in that case had he not connived to
some extent in his false denials ? or, despite the war minister's
long reputation as a womanizer, had macmillan really not known anything
? in that case, had he not been naive and negligent when he accepted
profumo's defense ? bed & bawd . in his own defense, macmillan
maintains that he was first informed of profumo's liaison last february
. he denies reports that mi-5 british intelligence had warned the
government at that time that its war minister had shared bed and bawd
with soviet assistant naval attache evgeny ivanov . macmillan insisted
that he had no reason to doubt a man of profumo's background (harrow,
oxford, infantry) . moreover, five of his ministers who " sat up half
the night " of march 21 interrogating profumo were also persuaded that
he was telling the truth ; the clincher was the war minister's
readiness to deny misconduct with christine keeler in a sacrosanct "
personal statement " on the house floor next day . macmillan's
strongest argument was that a security check, which he ordered a week
before his former colleague's confession, had turned up no evidence
that the russian had succeeded in using the profumo-keeler-ivanov
triangle to pry out secret information . something of a cabinet mutiny
seemed to be led by health minister enoch powell, 51, whose distaste
for political compromise led him to resign from the government in 1958
in protest against an inflationary, vote-catching budget . powell's
feeling that the government had once more shown itself unbelievably lax
was shared to a lesser degree by two more of macmillan's ablest
appointees, education minister sir edward boyle (who quit the
government over suez) and housing minister sir keith joseph, as well as
a disgruntled minority of tory backbenchers, who could themselves
overthrow the government if 20 or 30 chose to abstain this week . but
macmillan's assurances quelled the mutiny, and the tories marched into
commons outwardly united to face their greatest political threat since
suez .
an
attempt to find out the date on which the u.s . was supposed to " give
the h-bomb to west germany, " sounded more like a propaganda ploy than
serious espionage . flash of indignation . the opposition may yet
succeed in showing that britain's security system was in fact breached,
or that warnings from intelligence fell on deaf ears . whatever the
outcome of this week's commons debate, there is a growing belief that
macmillan will have to step down eventually and may in fact have
promised his own dissident ministers to do so once the heat is off .
loose factions were already forming around such possible successors to
macmillan as deputy prime minister r . a . ( " rab " ) butler,
chancellor of the exchequer reginald maudling and science minister lord
hailsham . no matter how eloquently macmillan may weather the
parliamentary crisis, the tories simply cannot afford to be tarred by
christine . what they have traditionally offered the nation is men born
and raised in the exacting disciplines of leadership . if now, in
addition to all the political and economic reverses they have suffered
in the past year, britons should conclude that etonian and harrovian
leaders are personally no wiser or more upright and in many cases they
have proved flagrantly less so than those whom they govern, twelve
years of tory government may end in a mighty flash of moral indignation
mixed with ridicule .
