there'll always be an . . . the morals of the british have always
intrigued and baffled foreigners . for centuries, europeans visiting
that cold, controlled country have discovered to their amazement and
frequent envy that the abundance, subtlety and variety of sexual sport
in london's demimonde make continental capitals seem parochial . until
recent years, it was impossible to go to dinner at london's most
fashionable clubs or private houses without passing swarms of
well-turned-out and sometimes handsome streetwalkers standing guard on
the sidewalk . like many another foreign analyst of anglo-saxon
attitudes, french diarist hippolyte taine, visiting london in the mid
19th century, could not comprehend how the english could sustain the "
vehemence and pungency of their passions " against " the harsh, though
silent, grinding of their moral machinery . " there is a widespread
feeling that britain's moral machinery is not grinding as harshly as it
used to . much in english life today suggests decadence and dissolution
. since the girls were driven off the streets four years ago, they have
taken to advertising their services in shop windows as " masseuses, " /
models, " or " french teachers . " london's booming striptease parlors
offer some of the crudest live pornography to be  seen publicly in
europe . its parks in summer are pre-empted by couples who aren't just
necking . one third of all teen-age brides in britain are already
pregnant . innumerable scandals preceding the profumo case suggest
considerable promiscuity, along with sexual arrangements infinitely
more complex than the old-fashioned triangle . and, as everyone knows,
homosexuality is " the english vice . " psychologist g . m . carstairs
commented recently : " popular morality is now a wasteland, littered
with the debris of broken conventions . concepts such as honor, or even
honesty, have an old-fashioned sound, but nothing has taken their place
. " getting caught . this harsh judgment may overlook the fact that
britain was never the sort of place victorian morality pretended it was
. if london today resembles babylon-on-thames, it is little more than a
de luxe model of the brutal, carnal 18th century city whose brothels,
boudoirs and gin shops ( " drunk for a penny, dead drunk for tuppence "
) were pictured by hogarth, richardson and fielding . says malcolm
muggeridge : " there's always been a lot of high-grade whoring in this
country, " and there is a lot of past evidence to prove him right .
george iv had his queen tried publicly for infidelity ; in the early
18th century, an archbishop of york maintained a harem at his palace .
the 18th century christine keeler was a miss chudleigh, who had been
the mistress of three peers when george ii spotted her at a costume
ball, cunningly disguised in a transparent gown . her georgian era came
between two noble marriages (one bigamous) . in the 18th century
phrase, borrowed from nautical terminology, miss chudleigh had "
bottom, " or what it takes .
indeed, the british
reserve a special order of venery for distinguished doxies such as emma
hamilton, the onetime streetwalker who for years was civilly shared by
her ambassador husband, sir william, and admiral lord nelson, the
father of her daughter . one of the most successful of all high-society
hustlers was harriette wilson, a regency beauty whose guest register
would have read like burke's peerage ; when she started publishing her
memoirs, she managed to collect double dividends from many former
patrons who preferred not to be immortalized . but not the iron duke of
wellington, who, when told by harriette that she planned to chronicle
his indiscretions, roared : " publish and be damned ! " she did .
since the mid-19th century, sin for a politician has meant getting
caught at it . at least three officially virtuous prime ministers, lord
palmerston, arthur balfour and lloyd george, were inveterate adulterers
. thus the state of sexual morality in britain today is probably no
worse than it ever was, and there is much evidence that it is better .
britain may not be a moral wasteland but a battleground in which a more
realistic, less hypocritical generation is attempting to win legal and
social recognition of the facts of everyday life . sparing the horses .
with the loss of empire and the decline of the church as an influence
in society, britons have tempered their old moral certitudes . author
james morris fears that his compatriots are becoming " congenitally
incapable of disregarding the opposite point of view, are constantly
grouping toward some general synthesis of everybody's point of view on
everything . " but the stir created by the profumo case suggests that
there is still a lot of power left in the " moral machinery . " what
has really changed in britain are matters of style and outlook, of
class and economic structure . fornication has always seemed more
spectacular in the upper and lower reaches of society . but now, says d
. w . brogan, " it may well be that the middle classes are taking up
the vices of their betters and also of their inferiors . " if there is
no longer real poverty in britain, the affluent society has been even
kinder to the new-rich . it is at this level that life in britain often
seems tasteless, aimless and immoral . a new twist to a victorian music
hall ballad " it's the rich wot gets the pleashoor, it's the poor wot
gets the blyme " was added recently by minister of housing sir keith
joseph, who said earnestly : " it is harder for the rich or the
relatively secure to be pure . " and yet too much can be blamed on
economic factors, leading to what the economist calls " the untenable
implication that adultery would have been less rampant if only the
country had been decent enough to stay poor . " decency is often a
question of style . many britons feel that there was nothing wrong, or
at least new, in a cabinet minister having a mistress . but there is a
slightly snobbish feeling that christine keeler and her set really were
a bit too casual . although in britain the official mistress has never
quite reached the glittering status she has in france, the great and
small affairs of the past were more likely to be quiet, settled,
near-permanent arrangements . a new factor, says daily mail columnist
anne scott-james, is the " sleaziness of the crowd with which the war
minister mixed . " says muggeridge : " fifty years ago people would
have gone to maida vale and patronized one of the grandes cocottes . if
there is anything new in this, it is the overlapping of the social life
of cliveden and of ward . " in short, britain may be in danger of
abandoning actress mrs . pat campbell's celebrated axiom about
edwardian london : " you can do anything you please here, so long as
you don't do it on the street and frighten the horses . /
