russia romanoff & juliet it was by all odds the most extraordinary
date a man and woman ever had . the soviets one day last week
orbited vostok v, piloted by air force lieut . colonel valery
feodorovich bykovsky, 28 . listen world, headlined izvestia, soviet man
is again storming the cosmos . but this time, soviet woman was
storming right along . two days later, bykovsky was joined in orbit by
the first female in space, lieut . valentina vladimirovna chereshkova,
26, at the controls of vostok vi . in radio and television
transmission to the breathless spectators on the ground, he referred
to himself as " the hawk, " while she called herself " the seagull . /
weightless . soon after bykovsky was launched, khrushchev gave a hint
of what was to come . when britain's visiting harold wilson asked how
many cosmonauts were up, he replied delightedly : " only one--so
far . /
as bykovsky soared through his orbit, at a speed of 18,000 m.p.h. and
in an oval that ranged from 109 miles to 139 miles above the earth,
he dined on roast beef and chicken, manually operated the controls of
his spacecraft . from the capsule, live television images were
periodically flashed to soviet viewers . bykovsky waved his logbook,
let his pencil and other objects float in the cabin to demonstrate
weightlessness . on his fourth orbit, the cosmonaut talked directly to
khrushchev in the kremlin . not yet a full-fledged party member,
bykovsky said : " i want to be a communist, a member of our great
leninist party . " after seagull joined hawk, there were more messages .
said khrushchev : " dear valentina vladimirovna, cordial
congratulations to the world's first woman cosmonaut on the wonderful
flight through the expanses of the universe :. a happy journey to you
! we will be extremely glad to meet you on soviet soil . /
smiling at the tv camera in her capsule--some viewers described her as
resembling a tougher-looking ingrid bergman--valentina thanked
khrushchev for his " fatherly concern, " assured everyone that she
was feeling fine . together . her biography made her sound like a
perfect specimen of socialist womanhood : father a tractor driver
killed in world war ii, mother a factory worker . cosmonette
valentina herself was a textile worker, night school student and
young communist functionary until she got interested in parachuting as
a hobby (she made 126 jumps) and was picked for cosmonaut training .
the russians , of course, had earlier managed a tandem space shot, with
two men . this time, though, the expectation was that they would try
to " dock " the two capsules together aloft,
thus possibly permitting one of the pair of cosmonauts to transfer
into the spacecraft of the other . even if this extra twist does not
come off, the duo flight once again proves that russia is at least two
years ahead of the u.s. in space, and moreover, knows how to woo
the world's females . stated purpose of the valery-valentina feat :
to study the impact of space " on the organism of a man and a woman . /
