greece the king wants to travel the king was working in the
garden . he seemed very glad to see me . we walked through the garden .
this is the queen, he said . she was clipping a rose bush . oh how do
you do, she said . we sat down at a table under a big tree and the king
ordered whiskey and soda . we have good whiskey anyway, he said . . . it
was very jolly . we talked for a long time . like all greeks he wanted
to go to america . thus, in just about the shortest story he ever
wrote, ernest hemingway 40 years ago described king constantine and
queen sophia as they were clinging to the unstable throne of greece .
last week constantine's son, king paul, was also in his gardened palace
at tatoi, outside athens, and the whiskey was still good . but unlike
his father, paul did not want to go to america . he wanted to go to
britain, and his premier would not let him, thereby precipitating a
first-class political crisis . private refuge . the petty-seeming issue
of the trip is actually part of a wider, more complex problem . premier
constantine karamanlis, 56, is a tough, staunchly anti-communist,
pro-nato politician who in his eight years in office (the longest
tenure for any greek prime minister) has given his country stable
government and a considerable measure of economic progress . but
leftists and liberals attack him for allegedly having rigged the 1961
elections, which returned him to power for a fourth term, and for
keeping about 1,000 political prisoners jailed who were arrested more
than 15 years ago during the country's bitter and victorious war with
red insurgents . communists and well-meaning liberals outside greece,
particularly in britain, this year started a concerted campaign against
the karamanlis regime, and against the royal family notably queen
frederika, who was accused of nazi connections . bertrand russell's
ban-the-bombers joined the fray, and last april, when frederika was in
london for the wedding of her third cousin princess alexandra, she was
set upon by a crowd of demonstrators and forced to seek refuge in a
private house . britain's anti-greek chorus was swelled by lord
beaverbrook, who, for reasons of his own, scurrilously attacked her in
his newspapers for her german background . with all this in mind,
karamanlis advised the king belatedly against a planned state visit to
britain in july . there might be similar incidents during the trip, he
said, and the greek rightists, resenting left-wing attacks abroad,
might make trouble, too, as they did in salonika recently, where a
left-wing member of the greek parliament was killed . the king's
plaintive rejoinder was that he had accepted the invitation long ago
and it would be ungentlemanly to back out now . the british had
promised adequate security . besides, he did not want to appear to give
in to pressure from the left . king paul was reinforced by pert queen
frederika who, like her great-great-grandmother queen victoria,
strongly feels that she knows better than her ministers what is good
for her country . embarrassing reds . rebuffed, karamanlis handed in
his resignation . usually known as loyal to the king, he was
nevertheless trying to put the royal family in its place, because of
widespread feeling in greece that they have taken a somewhat-too-active
part in politics of late . at the same time, karamanlis was trying to
bring about new elections, confident that his national radical union,
which holds 180 of 300 seats in parliament, would be victorious .
instead of calling elections, however, king paul at week's end was
attempting to patch up a coalition of present parties in parliament the
20 communist members, out of dislike of karamanlis, are embarrassingly
behind the king . but the attempt is doomed to failure unless some of
karamanlis' deputies join the coalition . karamanlis seemed undisturbed
by the royal maneuvering . " they are trying to break up my party, " he
said scornfully . snapping one finger across his palm, he added : /
but i have got my party like that . " meanwhile, without a government,
the king and queen quite literally did not know whether to stay in
their garden at tatoi or start packing for their trip . under the greek
constitution, the monarch cannot leave the country without the consent
of his government .
