yemen harried are the peacemakers for ten days, sweden's major
general carl von horn, 59, idled beside the crystal pool of beirut's
hotel phoenicia . then marching orders came from the united nations in
new york : by a 10-0 vote, with the soviet union abstaining, the
security council last week approved secretary-general u thant's plan to
send a u.n . truce team to strife-torn yemen . heading the advance
guard, von horn took off for yemen's capital city of san " a with the
objective of 1) ending saudi arabian aid to the royalist rebels, 2)
creating a 25-mile demilitarized strip along the saudi-yemeni frontier,
and 3) supervising the phased withdrawal of 28,000 egyptian troops who
have spent the last eight months bloodily propping up the republican
regime of president abdullah sallal against the royalist mountain
tribes fighting to restore deposed imam mohamed el badr to his
1,000-year-old throne . bombs at night . a peacemaking veteran with
years of experience in the gaza strip and the congo, von horn is not
sanguine about his chances in yemen . on a brief visit in april, he
discovered that royalist tribesmen had ambushed some 40 egyptian
soldiers, killed them all and stuffed their severed heads inside their
slashed-open bellies . at the time, von horn gloomily concluded that
the war could go on ten years . in new york, u thant blandly expects it
all to be over in " two to four months . " holed up in the impregnable
mountains of central yemen, the royalists make hit-and-run raids in all
directions, have sometimes infiltrated as close as the military airport
outside san " a . the egyptians have been on the defensive since
february and make only local counterattacks to regain objectives such
as
water sources, seized by the royalists . the offensive is left to
egypt's russian-built fighter and bomber planes, which plaster royalist
villages with high explosive and napalm . there were reports last week
that the egyptians are now using gas warfare to pry the rebels out of
their mountain caves . in the week before von horn's arrival, the
desperate egyptians made air strikes against saudi arabia . a dawn raid
on the seaport of jizan killed 25 and wounded 300 sleeping inhabitants
. the egyptian excuse : renewed royalist activity must mean renewed
military aid from saudi arabia . nonexistent ally . while his nation
suffered, yemen's president sallal was on a triumphal tour of the
middle east . though plagued by conspiracies at home he crushed two "
imperialist " plots in his own regime before leaving sallal got
tremendous ovations from street crowds in damascus and baghdad . in
lordly style, he urged the baathist leaders of syria and iraq to
disperse the " summer cloud " of their differences with egypt's nasser,
and grandly offered the virtually nonexistent yemen republican army as
an ally in repulsing " zionist and imperialist aggressors . " at his
mountain headquarters in yemen, the royalist leader imam badr told
newsmen he intends to keep fighting against the " egyptian colonization
of yemen, " and boasted that if the egyptians ever did leave, " we
would occupy the entire country within a week . " as for the united
nations, badr said, " i am not interested in the u.n., which i once
thought stood for justice . only the people of yemen will achieve a
solution . we put our trust in god and in our people . /
