south viet nam trial by fire the automobile at the head of the
procession of saffron-robed buddhist monks in saigon suddenly choked to
a stop at an intersection . the occupants of the car lifted its hood as
chanting priests began forming a circle seven or eight deep around the
vehicle . prayer beads clutched in his hand, a phlegmatic, 73-year-old
monk named thich quang duc sat down cross-legged on the asphalt in the
center of the circle . from under the auto's hood, a monk took a
canister of gasoline and poured it over the old priest . an expression
of serenity on his wizened face, quang duc suddenly struck a match . as
flames engulfed his body, he made not a single cry nor moved a muscle .
/ oh my god, " cried a western observer, " oh my god . " casting the
blame . in the buddhist faith, self-sacrifice is often undertaken to
transfer the suffering of others to one's self . the martyr is usually
considered a holy man so close to nirvana that he is unaffected by pain
. quang duc's premeditated act was a demonstration of buddhist
determination to force south viet nam's roman catholic president ngo
dinh diem to knuckle under to demands for increased religious freedom
(time, june 14) . in a will written " before closing my eyes to buddha,
/ quang duc wrote : " i have the honor of presenting my words to
president diem, asking him to be kind and tolerant toward his people
and to enforce a policy of religious equality . " diem's reply was to
clamp virtual martial law over saigon . all the city's main pagodas
were sealed off, and barbed-wire barricades blocked off streets . on
the radio, diem blamed quang duc's " tragic death " on " certain minds,
poisoned by seditious propaganda . " refusing to yield to buddhist
demands, diem added : " buddhism in viet nam finds its fundamental
safeguards in the constitution, of which i personally am the guardian .
/ the warning . but diem's intransigence troubled the u.s . in saigon,
u.s . embassy officials bluntly warned diem that the u.s . would
publicly condem his treatment of the buddhists unless he took prompt
action to redress their grievances . behind the u.s . threat was the
fear that continued buddhist discontent could cause passive resistance
to government programs in the rural provinces where political unity is
the key to victory in the war against the communist viet cong . the u.s
. warning seemed to sink in . at meetings with buddhist leaders,
government officials tentatively acceded to all their demands the
government
promised to change existing laws so as to give buddhism equal standing
with catholicism, granted buddhists the right to fly their flags at
religious festivals . it was the flag restriction at hue last month
that set off demonstrations in which nine buddhist marchers were gunned
down by government troops . under prodding from buddhist leaders, the
government, which had blamed the viet cong for the hue tragedy,
reluctantly agreed to take the blame for the incident . but if the
government should renege on its agreement, the buddhists have
threatened two more ritualistic suicides one by fire and one by
disembowelment .
