africa albert schweitzer : an anachronism still they come, all
year round, to see the famed old man in his storied jungle setting .
public figures like adlai stevenson, starry-eyed u.s . peace corpsmen,
spinster schoolteachers realizing a longstanding dream all come for a
visit to dr . albert schweitzer . at his mission three miles upstream
from the gabonese village of lambarene, " the great white doctor, " now
88, affably greets them, autographing his books in a fine, steady hand
. yet, after devoting nearly two-thirds of his life ministering to the
sick of equatorial africa and being widely regarded as a near saint,
schweitzer is an anachronism in today's africa . after a journey to
lambarene, time correspondent jon randal reported why : once, to see
schweitzer, travelers had to be paddled the 175 miles from portgentil
on the atlantic . now they arrive by air from the gabonese capital of
libreville and put down at lambarene's modern airport, not far from a
modern, antiseptic government hospital . on the short trip up the
ogooue river, the visitors pass natives skimming by in brand-new boats
powered by evinrude outboards . finally they reach schweitzer's
hospital . set ghostlike amid wild palms and tangled jungle
undergrowth, its tin roofs and ramshackle wooden buildings are worthy
of rain or the heart of darkness . changeless isolation . in the
halfcentury since schweitzer came to lambarene with his wife helene and
performed his first operation in a converted hen house, the mission has
expanded but otherwise changed little . at the river landing there are
only pirogues, crude dugout canoes, the one type of river ambulance
schweitzer will use . ( " brancardier ! brancardier ! " (stretcher
bearer) the oarsmen cry when they arrive with an emergency.) the
hospital compound is without telephone, running water or refrigeration,
has electricity only in the main building, which houses the tiny,
antiquated operating theater . sterilization is carried out in an
outdoor lean-to and the only toilet is an outhouse for the use of the
foreign staff . with a capacity for some 400 patients, schweitzer's
clinic is forever jammed . the sick, carrying paper tags with their
names, villages and tribes, wait for hours to see the doctors, are
bedded down on straw-mattress cots in dark, stench-ridden huts whose
earth floors are awash during the rainy season . outside, over open
fires, the patients' women relatives cook, while a horde of chickens,
dogs and goats (protected under schweitzer's " reverence for life "
mystique by which no living thing should be unnecessarily disturbed)
roam at will, adding freely to the surrounding filth . when a patient
dies and his body is unclaimed, it is wrapped in a fern-andpalm-leaf
shroud, laid in a wooden box, and buried in the bush . tailored for
primitives . despite such squalor, schweitzer's institution has a good
medical record, and the city's europeans generally choose it over the
new government hospital . few hospitals anywhere can offer such a
dedicated staff, or one that lives as austerely . each of the doctors
and nurses occupies a single room equipped with iron bed, enamel wash
basin and kerosene lamp ; meals usually consist of fried bananas and
other fruit . the old man stubbornly refuses to go modern . says he :
/ circumstances command that the hospital be primitive in keeping with
the primitive state of the people . " he believes that africans enjoy
discomfort, and that they are often afraid of a gleaming white modern
hospital, but not of one that reminds them of their villages a concept
less valid today than 20 years ago . his african critics take
schweitzer's insistence on primitiveness as an insult, or a needless
prolongation of " the white man's burden . " symbolically, they point
out, he and his staff still wear pith helmets . the concept that the
dark continent can make more progress through independence is, to
schweitzer, folly . told that the peace corps is building primary
schools all over gabon, and that the little country has 14 medical
students training in france, dr . schweitzer merely chuckles and says
of the blacks : " you cannot change their mentality . " among his six
doctors and 17 nurses, there is not one african, nor is he training any
. says an upper-class african in lambarene : " i'd rather die
unattended than be humiliated at dr . schweitzer's hospital . "
according to the sun . bushy white hair aflare, drooping mustache
aquiver, cotton strips wound around his arms to absorb the sweat, he is
a little deaf but alert as a lion . he is still planning additions to
the hospital and is working on volume iii of the philosophy of
civilization . a few weeks ago, he announced that he would make no more
rest visits to europe, which his disciples take to mean that schweitzer
wants to die at lambarene, where his wife was buried six years ago . in
the jungle, the doctor has built a private world for himself which he
refuses to alter . even his time is his own ; the hospital clocks do
not run on g.m.t., like all the rest of the country, but are set
according to the sun . as far back as world war i, schweitzer expressed
his dislike for the modern world outside : " in a thousand different
ways mankind has been persuaded to give up its natural relations with
reality and to seek its welfare in the magic formulas of some kind of
economic and social witchcraft . " schweitzer has made his own reality
; he lives in the africa of 1913, hardly knowing or caring that a
continent and a century have passed him by .
