great britain the lost leader as the house of commons
clock ticked toward starting time for the great debate, there were only
two empty seats in the jammed, expectant chamber . the first was
filled, with four minutes to spare, by harold macmillan, who sat down
stiffly on the government's front bench, looking as chill and wan as
his effigy at madame tussaud's . two minutes later, a short, plump man
in a shabby grey suit bustled expressionlessly down the gangway, sank
into the opposition front bench facing macmillan, and fingered a
cardboard file . as the clock struck, labor party leader harold wilson
rose to his feet and for a second savored the tingling silence before
breaking it with his flat nasal yorkshire voice . " this is a debate, "
he began, " without precedence in the annals of the house . " the two
men were the products of two remarkable political careers and also of
two britains : macmillan, the skillful, courageous and often ruthless
patrician who had rescued his country from the debris of suez and led
it into an era of unprecedented prosperity ; harold wilson, the dry,
diligent and often devious son of a provincial chemist who had risen by
hard work and chance (including the death of the man he succeeded, hugh
gaitskell) to the top of the labor party . as he faced macmillan, who
had gone to oxford by family tradition, harold wilson, who had gone to
oxford on a scholarship, strove to embody a new, impatient,
class-defying england . the moral decay surrounding the profumo affair,
he tried hard to suggest, must be blamed on the tories . referring to
christine keeler's reported $14,000-a-week nightclub contract, wilson
declared : " there is something utterly nauseating about a system of
society which pays a harlot 25 times as much as it pays its prime
minister . " for the rest, harold wilson stuck to the security issue
and the government's handling of the profumo case, which he attacked as
either dishonest or incompetent, or both . let down . the once
unflappable macmillan fidgeted in his seat and kept dabbing at the
pouches beneath his eyes with a crumpled handkerchief . when he rose,
he openly played for the sympathy of his colleagues . " what has
happened, " he said, " has inflicted a deep, bitter and lasting wound
on me . " essentially his defense was that he had been grossly deceived
by profumo an " almost unbelievable " culprit and badly let down by his
subordinates, who failed to keep him informed . from the back benches
came a rude gibe of " nobody ever tells me nuffin ! " by the time
macmillan finished, the house was prepared to acquit him of personal
dishonesty and moral turpitude, but he had convicted himself of
negligence and naivete or perhaps simply of a fatal ability to avert
his eyes from what he did not wish to see . in the vote following the
debate, 27 conservatives voted against macmillan or abstained . on all
sides there were cries of " resign, resign, " and this is what
macmillan will almost certainly have to do the only remaining question
being when . the warning . the long debate served to fix government
responsibility, or the lack of it, and illustrated the odd nature of
the british security system, compounded of shrewdness, inefficiency,
and an often misguided sense of sportsmanship that goes to
extraordinary lengths in protecting members of the club . the case, as
it emerged from the debate, falls into four phases .
first, there was the christine-profumo affair
itself, which, according to profumo, lasted only a few months, from
july to december 1961, but by other evidence possibly lasted longer .
during those same months, christine also entertained russian assistant
naval attache evgeny ivanov, who had been pals for some time with her
mentor, dr . stephen ward . mi-5, british intelligence, apparently
discovered only half of what wilson scathingly called " this dingy
quadrilateral . " in august 1961, according to the commons debate,
cabinet secretary sir norman brook warned profumo that it would be
better for the secretary for war not to be too friendly with ward ; he
did not mention, and evidently did not know about, christine . nothing
of this was reported to macmillan . in the second phase, which covers
most of 1962, rumors of the affair kept reaching the newspapers, tory
and labor politicians, but apparently not the prime minister . during
the cuba blowup, ward was all over the place, suggesting to the prime
minister's office and to the foreign office that his friend ivanov be
used as an intermediary to help settle the crisis . but said macmillan,
a lot of people were then trying to get into the act " to weaken our
resolution . " a little later, wilson himself got a letter from ward,
boasting of his supposed help in settling the cuba matter, but filed it
away as coming from a crank . before ivanov was recalled to moscow in
january 1963, he aroused suspicion in other ways . a bridge player who
took a hand in some very high-level games, he lost steadily, as much as
$140 a night . " i do not believe the soviet embassy's petty cash would
stand such losses every night, " said one labor m.p . caustically, /
unless they got something for it . " the vigil . in the third and most
remarkable phase, macmillan finally became aware that there was such a
thing as a profumo case . in january 1963, as macmillan told commons
police learned from christine that ward had asked her to find out from
profumo when the u.s . was to deliver certain nuclear information and
warheads to west germany (she said that she refused to do it) .
macmillan was not told of this either . but while he was away in italy,
the general manager of the huge (circ . 6,500,000) news of the world
reported the profumo rumors to macmillan's principal private secretary
. confronted with the story, profumo denied everything to several
officials ; the relationship had been innocent, he said, and anyway
had ended long before . why didn't the prime minister question profumo
himself at any time ? macmillan's lame answer : he assumed that
profumo would speak more freely to others, and furthermore such an
interrogation would have made " social relations " between himself and
profumo highly embarrassing . and why didn't anyone attempt to
interrogate christine herself to check out profumo's denial ? to
this, macmillan had no answer at all . after christine failed to appear
as a witness last march in the trial of a jealous negro lover who had
tried to shoot her, questions were finally raised in parliament .
macmillan asked for action, admittedly hoping for a statement from
profumo that would quell further rumors in the press through fear of
libel . when the house adjourned after midnight, profumo was awakened,
and at 1 : 30 a.m . came to chief tory whip martin redmayne's commons
office with his solicitor . he was confronted by redmayne, tory
chairman iain macleod, minister without portfolio william deedes,
attorney general sir john hobson and solicitor general sir peter
rawlinson . two of profumo's interrogators had been at harrow with him
. where last week he
was expelled from the communist party, dismissed from the intelligence
service, and sent to a mental hospital .
the letter . under friendly questioning until
5 a.m., profumo denied misconduct with christine . he agreed to make a
sacrosanct " personal statement, " assuring the house that he had
committed " no impropriety whatsoever " with miss keeler . his fellow
ministers suggested that he admit at least to being " on friendly terms
with her, " although it " sounded so awful, " as profumo put it . " we
insisted that it must be included, " explained macleod fatuously last
week, " because it was part of the truth . " against himself and the
four other ministers, macleod added, " two possible charges can be
brought . first, that we were conspiring knaves, and secondly, that we
were gullible fools . " they were indeed gullible but obviously they
wanted to be . even the most cursory checking would have disclosed that
while christine may have had joie de vivre, she had little discretion .
profumo's interrogators knew by then about a letter he had written to
christine in 1961 beginning " darling . . . " profumo explained, as
macmillan put it, that in his circles " it was a term of no great
significance . i believe that this might be accepted . i do not live
among young people fairly widely . " but if it was acceptable to
macmillan, at 69 a little remote from reality, it should not have
fooled the others . " we were a bunch of ninnies, " admits one of the
five privately, and adds with extraordinary logic : " we recalled that
earlier case, in which " my dear vassall' proved to be harmless, so we
were bound to feel that " darling' might well be similarly harmless . "
the exit . the last phase of the case began after profumo proclaimed
his purity to the house, was warmly patted on the back by the prime
minister, and with his wife, actress valerie hobson, went off to the
races with the queen mother, and later attended a tory ball at
quaglino's, a west end nightclub . but there were editors and m.p.'s
who knew by now that he had lied, and profumo showed himself both
arrogant and stupid in thinking that he could suppress the truth
indefinitely by libel suits . (in fact, he sued paris-match for libel
and collected out of court from italy's tempo illustrato.) besides,
ward began to talk, and to labor m.p . george wigg he unfolded a tale,
as wilson described it in the commons, that " took the lid off a corner
of the london underworld vice and dope, marijuana, blackmail and
counter-blackmail, violence, petty crime . " added wilson gratuituously
: " if ward's statement had been published as a fiction paperback in
america, it would have seemed overdrawn and beyond belief . "  wilson
sent an account of the wardwigg conversation to macmillan, who turned
it over to the " appropriate authorities, " who found nothing
disturbing in it . prodded further, macmillan wrote wilson : " there
seems to be nothing in the papers you sent which requires me to take
any action . /
when john vassall, a homosexual admiralty clerk, was convicted
last october of spying for the russians, macmillan summarily fired the
clerk's superior, thomas galbraith, who had written the clerk some
letters starting " my dear vassall . " galbraith was later wholly
exonerated .
though possibly not in britain, where tropic of cancer has been a
bestseller for months and the unexpurgated lady chatterley's lover has
sold 3,500,000 paperback copies .
even after ward sent wilson, the home
secretary and the entire british press a letter announcing that profumo
had lied to the house of commons, the disclosure " did not seem to make
any impression " on the prime minister . while ordering the lord
chancellor to investigate ward's charges, macmillan assured wilson he
was confident nonetheless that the security question had been " fully
and efficiently watched " although, as wilson accurately pointed out,
mi-5 men apparently knew nothing about christine until they read about
her in the papers . as the dismal facts and alibis tumbled out in the
commons, the adulation and affection the tories had once bestowed on "
macwonder " turned almost visibly to a kind of stupefied pity . at the
end of his defense, macmillan pleaded : " i am entitled to the
sympathetic understanding and confidence of the house and of the
country . " but from the tory benches, as he sat down, came a sound
that was more sigh than cheer . by twos and threes, perturbed
backbenchers went out to argue in the lobbies while several tory
speakers caustically condemned the prime minister . macmillan rose and
with bowed head left the chamber . who next ? some angry tories felt
that macmillan should resign at once, but at a backbenchers' meeting
the view prevailed that, as one cabinet minister put it, " the country
must not get the feeling that he is being hounded out because of
christine keeler . our party would never recover from that . " the
present consensus is that macmillan will be allowed to retire rather
than to resign, some time this summer or fall . in perspective, he may
well remain one of the most successful prime ministers in tory history,
but few conservatives want him in command of their next election
campaign ; even preprofumo, the party had been in bad trouble over
defense muddles, britain's failure to enter the common market, and
above all macmillan's stop-and-go fiscal policies and a sluggish
economy . although macmillan has systematically eliminated rivals by
giving them thankless tasks or sacking them, the tories have a number
of highly plausible successors . currently in the lead (daily express
odds : 4-7) is chancellor of the exchequer reginald maudling, who is
youthful (46) and ready to take credit for a predicted economic spurt
this summer . he is also happily married, a particularly useful
qualification right now . next are deputy prime minister " rab " butler
(2-1), who has all the necessary experience, but at 60 may have been
around too long ; and lord hailsham, bellicose, blimpish science
minister, 55, whose hopes faded rapidly when the government said that
its lords reform bill, which would permit him to sit in the commons,
would not be introduced this summer . ted heath, 46, is generally ruled
out because he is associated with the common market failure, and
besides, he is a bachelor . what next ? any one of these tories could
give labor a good fight in the next election, which does not have to be
held till the fall of 1964 . but laborites feel themselves closer to
power than they have at any time in the last dozen years . at week's
end harold wilson returned to the attack in the commons, demanding an
investigation of the profumo case by a parliamentary select committee
with sweepoing powers . the more limited judicial inquiry proposed by
macmillan, cried wilson, was merely " a cover-up, " because, without
authority to compel proof of the attendance of witnesses, it would have
to collect evidence " from some of the most unmitigated liars in this
country were there any more revelations to come wilson wanted to know
. nothing he knew of right now, said macmillan, but he added : " i
have heard terrible things said of all sorts of people the most
authoritative source of all, christine herself, volunteered : " apart
from those i have already mentioned in my story, i do not know and have
not met any ministers . " macmillan recovered his composure . " they
have deeply wounded me, " he told a tory rally, adding : " it will not
break my spirit . " but the house still remembered the words of tory
rebel nigel birch, who during the big debate had quoted browning's the
lost leader at harold macmillan : let him never come back to us !
there would be doubt, hesitation and pain . forced praise on our part
the glimmer of twilight, never glad confident morning again !
