what a labor government would be like it may still be
a long way back to power, but every by-election and opinion poll in
britain today indicates that a growing majority of voters want a labor
government . in a far more prosperous society than the warweary nation
that elected the last labor regime in 1945, the question is what life
would be like under new socialist leaders . curiosity is most intense
among voters under 30, who have been spared memories of the snoek
(canned mock salmon), " reconstituted " eggs and whale steak of
previous laborite austerity . sensing that this new
you-never-had-it-so-good generation is both weary of tory rule and
leary of socialist dogma, the labor program today emphasizes "
pragmatism " and " responsibility " rather than headlong plunges into
doctrinaire experiments . the party's catchwords, a heady blend of
gladstonian rhetoric and new frontier pep talk, call for " a sense of
purpose " to " get britain moving . " how much of its ambitious program
will actually be enacted depends on the kind of majority it can win at
the polls . but there are some fair indications of what labor aims to
do . nationalization state ownership of industry which winston
churchill called that " burglar's jemmy to crack the capitalist crib "
is the goal most commonly associated with a socialist administration .
tory scaremongers even claim that labor already has a " shopping list "
of 104 companies it plans to nationalize . however, after bitter
argument the labor party has abandoned its longtime commitment to
public ownership of the economy's " commanding heights . " it plans now
only to renationalize steel, which was partially restored to private
enterprise by the tories, and britain's trucking industry . the economy
a labor government would demand broad powers to regulate the economy .
it would give manufacturers tax incentives and guaranteed orders for
exports, but would itself build and run pacesetting plants in any
industries, such as machine tools, that it judges inadequate or
inefficient . socialist principle demands a tax on capital gains, which
have been largely immune so far, and possibly even a levy on capital .
in harold wilson's words, britain has a " laissez-faire, soft-center,
speculative, hirepurchase, advertiser-controlled, stop-go economy . "
to change this, labor would have to transform completely the nation's
business life . hence the economist sees labor's economic aims as " at
once consoling and frightening . " to ease the nation's critical dearth
of living space and clear its squalid legacy of slums, labor promises
to commit more public funds to new housing and redevelopment, restore
rent controls, and regulate new construction . labor also aims to break
the age-old power of wealthy landowners, who seldom sell property
outright but give developers long-term leases on which the landlords
continue to collect " ground rent . " new legislation would give all
leaseholders the right to buy actual " freehold " ownership of their
land . europe in theory, the professedly " internationalist " labor
party ought to be for britain's entry into the common market, probably
would have backed it had labor been in power when the issue arose . but
a large segment of labor distrusts catholic europe and suspects that
the common market is a conspiracy to strengthen capitalism . besides,
many ultraconservative british trade unionists fear foreign competition
. a labor administration might be willing to reopen negotiations for
common market membership, but its tougher terms would make britain's
admission more difficult even if de gaulle's opposition were to
diminish . the u.s . & defense labor would " stand firmly " by nato,
and would happily leave the u.s . in charge of the west's nuclear
defense and abandon britain's independent deterrent . admittedly,
britain would become a second-class military power, but wilson
maintains that it can remain " very important " if it develops its
conventional forces . he considers britain's present defenses " more
ineffective and inappropriate than at any time since ethelred the
unready " who failed to deter the danes in 1013 and promises to reequip
and rearm britain's army of the rhine . while the pentagon, dreading
nuclear " proliferation, " is cheered by labor's willingness to
renounce britain's deterrent, this might strengthen labor's vocal
neutralistunilateralist wing . east & west wilson proposes regular
annual summit meetings of u.s., british and soviet heads of state at
the u.n., says that the proposal was warmly received when he visited
moscow this month . labor is irrevocably opposed to giving west germany
nuclear weapons (so is the u.s.) ; it is equally opposed to any
arrangement, such as the u.s . proposal for a multilateral polaris
force, that might ultimately give germans a finger on the nuclear
trigger . though anglophile ludwig erhard is taking over from
anglophobe konrad adenauer, labor's outspoken fear of germany is as
vehement as ever . labor favors nuclear-free zones and thinning out of
forces to reduce tension in central europe, africa, latin america, the
middle east . in europe, however, wilson insists that " disengagement
should not be used by either side to upset the balance of forces . " on
the berlin question, labor agrees with the u.s . that the western
garrison and free access to the city are essential . education &
science labor shrewdly senses that the country pressing need is for a
greatly expanded educational system, both to achieve its ideal of a
classless society and to increase the flow of technicians, scientists
and managers who are vital to economic growth on the scale envisaged by
labor . the party proposes to abolish university fees, start 45 new
universities in 20 years, and greatly expand existing facilities for
technical training and scientific research . " politics, " say
laborites, " is education . /
