goddess of the gravel pits
there was another swimming pool in christine keeler's life before the
one at cliveden . as a young girl, she would often swim in the muddy
gravel pits near the dingy, thames-side town of wraysbury . envious of
her looks, her girl friends called her the " goddess of the gravel pits
. " / i remember christine stepping from the water, " says one
childhood chum . " her homemade bikini of yellow jersey wool clung to
her . " from makeshift bikinis to paris originals, the life of
christine keeler was discussed in intimate detail last week, not only
in the house of commons but also in every british newspaper . for all
the sentimental and psychological cliches about a pretty child from a
broken home, what emerged was a circean odyssey of a girl who always
knew what she and what men wanted . bright lights . her parents split
up when she was a child . with her mother, christine moved into a
converted bus coach near the thames that was little more than a shanty
on wheels . even then, christine's eye was on the main chance . often
she would climb up on the knee of a neighbor and beg to be told about
the bright lights in the big cities . " she was forever asking me to
tell her stories about life in london, " recalls the neighbor . /
i spent hours telling her about her
dreamland . " christine eventually took a job in a london dress house .
at a small soho cafe called the zodiac, she met a spanish waiter named
carlo, began spending weekends with him at his seedy soho boardinghouse
. then a girl friend introduced her to a u.s . air force sergeant . "
night after night we whooped it up with the yanks, " recalls the friend
. " they were twelve very gay months . " but christine got pregnant,
gave birth prematurely to a son she called peter . the infant died six
days later . christine was just 17 . out of work and short of cash,
christine became the mistress of a rich rollsroyce-driving real estate
man, who set her up in a luxurious flat off baker street . but the
affair proved unsatisfactory, and she went to work as a waitress, then
as a showgirl in murray's cabaret club . " and then, " christine said,
/ i began meeting my first interesting male companions . /
no man's collar . one was stephen
ward, and a few months after they met in 1959, christine moved into his
flat in wimpole mews . " it was a sort of brother-and-sister
relationship, " said christine, " nothing else . " a feature of ward's
apartment was a one-way mirror permitting observation of the bedroom
from the living room ; this elaborate peephole was covered by a
picture of buddha when not in use . " that was installed by an old
eccentric who used to own this place, " ward said . " i'm going to have
it filled in . " an elaborate practical joker, ward often put a dog
collar around christine's neck and led her around london on a leash .
sometimes christine received guests wearing nothing but skintight blue
jeans, once gave a party at which all the guests sat drinking champagne
in her bathroom . one of her thirstiest friends was evgeny ivanov .
though he was a bit of a prig, ivanov was a devoted reader of the
steamy james bond novels, found them amusing but ridiculous . " he
professed to dislike loose women, did not like christine even to use
cosmetics . but one hot july night, recalls christine, ivanov finally "
came to forsake all his principles and his pride . suddenly he was
kissing me, rolling his dark curls into my neck . . . " afterward,
ivanov was " sad, very sad . " charming but wary . that very same
weekend christine had met jack profumo for the first times at cliveden,
and christine, who was visiting ward at his cottage on the grounds, was
stealing a nude moonlight swim in astor's pool . suddeny bill astor
appeared with some guests, including profumo . frantically clutching a
towel around her dripping self, christine was introduced to both jack
and his wife, valerie hobson . " she was very charming, " said
christine, " but seemed wary of me . " next day, christine brought
ivanov out to cliveden, and the russian and profumo held a swimming
race, which jack only won by cheating . " that will teach you to trust
the british government, " profumo told ivanov . later that same day, he
asked christine for her telephone number ; she told him to get it from
ward .
jack and christine met
several times in ward's flat . " mentally, we became very close, " said
christine . it happened, just like it happened with ivanov . at least
that is how christine told it in the news of the world : " there was
one of those electric, potent silences, and he was kissing me and i was
returning his kisses with everything i suddenly felt for him . " once,
when valerie was in ireland on holiday, profumo took christine to his
house in regent's park . " we crept around the lovely rooms and then we
got to their bedroom . " marvellous place . christine also cavorted
with members of london's vast west indian contingent, had affairs with
jamaican johnnie edgecombe and singer lucky gordon . " when i first met
her, " said gordon, " she was asking the waitress in a cafe where she
could get some indian hemp (marijuana) . knowing this, i wanted to know
her . " there were a number of others . scotland yard is said to have
christine's notebook, and the notebook is said to be full of names .
throughout, christine never forgot the gravel pits or mum . when she
took temporary refuge in spain last march, christine sent a postcard
home .
/ marvellous place, /
she wrote . " lots of nicelooking men . don't worry, having a ball
since
then, the ball has continued, more or less, and so has fame . at the
cassius clay fight at wembley stadium last week, there was a sudden
flurry as a glamorous woman swept to her ringside seat . " is that
christine keeler ? " asked a spectator . " no, " said his neighbor, "
only elizabeth taylor . /
