russia women are different to hear the russians tell it, all the
world's women were in chains before valentina vladimirovna tereshkova .
as the first woman cosmonaut looped the earth, tass exulted : " a
brilliant star has flared up in the cosmic firmament . it outshines all
the film stars in the world . never and in no country did women ever
attain such height . " in every russian village, women celebrated, and
congratulations were fired aloft from such soviet heroines as lyubi li,
described in the press as " the renowned corn planter and hero
of socialist labor . " in her space capsule, vostok vi, " valya " was
still the compleat soviet woman . her space suit was embroidered with a
snow-white dove, and she had had her hair done before blastoff . once a
tomboy, she now has an admitted weakness for spiked heels, stylish
clothes, and a perfume called red moscow . from space she radioed
ground control : " please tell mamma not to worry . " once, when
ground scientists lost contact with " seagull " (valya's orbital call
name), they hastily ordered her cosmic companion in vostok v, lieut .
colonel valery feodorovich bykovsky, to try and rouse her . " sorry, i
was having a snooze, " apologized valya . missed rendezvous . over
their radios, valya and valery sang songs of friendship to each other,
flashed " best wishes to the industrious american people " and " warm
greetings to the multimillioned chinese . " loosening their harnesses,
both cosmonauts performed calisthenics while floating weightlessly in
their cabins . but though the two vostoks passed within three miles of
each other, their orbital paths were so divergent that they could not
rendezvous . since u.s . scientists had fully expected the two capsules
to link up in space, they speculated that soviet scientists had made a
launching miscalculation . three days and 48 orbits after takeoff,
valya re-entered the atmosphere, was ejected from her capsule and
floated to earth by parachute near a small village in kazakhstan ;
slowed by another parachute, the empty vostok vi landed near by . two
hours and 46 minutes later and some 500 miles away, bykovsky landed
similarly in the meadow of a collective farm after a record 81 orbits
and 119 hours aloft . but bykovsky was all but forgotten in the furor
over valya . television commentators described her " cornflower blue
eyes, " and peasants showered her with bouquets . overcome by her
welcome, valya broke into tears ; it was the first time, moscow
assured the world, that anyone had seen her cry since she was a child .
in a telephone conversation with nikita khrushchev, she admitted that
she had bruised her nose in landing, said that the " people received me
very cordially in the russian manner with bread and salt . "
foresightedly, she had brought along photographs of herself and passed
them out to workers who greeted her, giving most of the pictures to
women . " i prefer women today, " she said . " the men shouldn't
complain . " when she flew into moscow for her official reception three
days later, valya was greeted by more flowers than anyone had ever
remembered seeing before in the russian capital, a bear hug and kiss
from khrushchev, and her best beau, bachelor cosmonaut andrian
nikolayev . paper dolls . though russia's second double shot added
little new to space technology, the fact that valya was not a pilot and
admittedly was mechanically unsophisticated raised the question of why
u.s . astronauts all must be skilled test pilots . the answer from nasa
officials : use of test pilots permits the elimination of
space-consuming automatic equipment in the cramped capsules . but some
authorities are convinced that young scientists would be far more
effective in observing and analyzing unexpected space flight
phenomena. says clinton anderson, chairman of the senate space
committee : " the russians have proved to us that you don't have to
have 20 years of test-pilot experience before you can handle one of
these capsules fervent agreement was voiced by u.s . feminists . said
jane hart, wife of michigan senator philip hart and leader in the fight
to get women astronauts accepted by solidly misogynistic nasa : " i'm
tempted to go out to the barn and tell the story to my horse and listen
to him laugh . " added clare boothe luce : " we must stop trying to
make paper dolls of our women . " anthropologist margaret mead warned
: " the russians treat men and women interchangeably . we treat men
and women differently . " and vive la difference, said at least one
russian male last week . " my age and conservative mental makeup
compelled me to think up to the last few days that we men were the
rulers of man's mind and the salt of the earth, " said novelist mikhail
(and quiet flows the don) sholokhov . " and what do we see now ? a
woman in space ! say what you will, this is incomprehensible . it
contradicts all my set conceptions of the world and its possibilities .
many scientists
doubt astronaut gordon cooper's report of seeing trucks on the road
and smoke coming out of chimneys in tibet . according to dr . w . r .
adey of u.c.l.a., this is equivalent to seeing objects 1 in . in
diameter 4,000 ft . away . he thinks cooper had disorders of vision or
judgment .
