communists now for the main event nikita khrushchev had more
reasons last week to wonder why he ever invited a red chinese
delegation to moscow . twenty-five reasons, to be exact, all neatly
numbered in a letter for convenient " point-by-point discussion " at
the scheduled sino-soviet meeting next week . mao tse-tung's latest
message to nikita the most vehement to date in the continuing quarrel
doomed the confrontation to failure before it began . peking
deliberately left the kremlin no room for compromise . after years of
discussion over whether the split was real, western skeptics could no
longer doubt that it was deep, jagged, and unbridgeable for a long time
to come . parrot & stick . in 24,000 brazenly contemptuous words, mao
accused khrushchev of spawning a new personality cult worse than
stalin's, assailed the kremlin for " great power chauvinism and
economic pressure " against other red nations, charged the soviets with
trying to purge foreign communist parties . exclaimed red china : "
what is all this if not subversion ? " at the same time, peking was
not above attempting some subversion of its own . appealing to moscow's
east european satellites, the statement declared : " if a party cannot
use its brains to think for itself, but instead is a party that parrots
the words of others, runs hither and thither in response to the baton
of certain persons abroad, such a party is incapable of leading the
masses . " the crux of the chinese dispute with russia remained
moscow's propaganda line of peaceful coexistence with the west . this
policy, said peking scornfully, was plucked out of " some mystical book
from heaven " ; moreover, those who dare to disagree are treated " as
heretics deserving to be burned at the stake . how can the chinese
communists agree ? they cannot . it is impossible . " as always,
peking stuck to the dogma that the road to violent revolution in
africa, asia and latin america was the only path a true marxist could
follow . as for soviet charges of warmongering, the red chinese replied
with an argument that, ironically, echoed some pentagon strategists .
brush-fire wars, declared peking, need not necessarily escalate into an
all-out nuclear struggle . truth was, declared the manifesto, the
russians were too selfish and scared to risk their bourgeois gains in
far-off battles . " to put it bluntly, " said red china, " whoever
considers that a revolution can be made only if everything is plain
sailing, only if there is an advance guarantee against failure, is
certainly not a revolutionary . " keep talking . peking's punch was
neatly timed to catch the kremlin off balance . it landed on the eve of
a special central committee meeting called to discuss russia's internal
ideological troubles . for four days the russians were stunned and
speechless . finally the central committee angrily announced that it
would not even bother to publish red china's " distorted, unwarranted
attack . " chinese communist newspapers triumphantly headlined russia's
refusal to print the chinese document . even russia's vaunted space
feats were nothing that nikita could take credit for . " during the
stalin era he was a thirdor even fourth-rate man, " the newspaper
reported . " he had nothing to do with nuclear and space developments .
/ in russia's own bailiwick, the chinese reds also stayed on the
offensive . communist rumania, which has been feuding with the kremlin
over moscow's interference in its economic affairs, gleefully published
a lengthy summary of the red chinese indictment . peking's embassy in
moscow boldly distributed russian-language copies of its manifesto .
callers were greeted by an attache, and after a polite chat over tea,
got as many translations of the 63-page document as they wanted .
