italy epitaph for the apertura italy last week had a
premier, but no leader, a cabinet, but no effective government, and a
parliament that may well be dissolved without passing a single
significant law . the nation faced the prospect of political turmoil
unmatched since the communist bid for power was turned back in 1948 .
shut tight was the risky apertura a sinistra (opening to the left),
with no new apertura in sight in any particular direction . broad jump
. the left-center opening was created 17 months ago by leftwing
christian democrats in alliance with pietro nenni's socialists and with
the tacit consent of the vatican . the idea was that this coalition
enact overdue " reforms " in agriculture, education and finance,
backed by the socialists but opposed by italy's right-wing parties . at
the same time, the christian democrats, somewhat naively machiavellian,
hoped to separate nenni from his longtime communist allies . nenni, a
practical political jumper, seemed ready to leap again . he had been a
pal of mussolini's when both were young fascists ; he soon broke with
il duce (who nearly had him shot), fought against the communists until
the early '30s, made up with them after the war, when he took most of
his party into the red camp . (the remaining anti-communist socialists
formed italy's social democratic party under giuseppe saragat.) after
hungary, nenni again partly broke with the communists . now, at 72, he
was toying with bourgeois respectability by cooperating with the center
parties but his own followers were not so eager . they might own cars
or go skiing at st . moritz, but most of them still hankered for
alliance with the communists a feeling that was reinforced by massive
red gains in the recent national elections . nenni made a deal with
premierdesignate aldo moro for the socialists' 87 votes in the chamber
of deputies . moro's christian democrats would support socialist
demands for 15 new regional governments, even though it meant that in
some key industrial regions socialists could wind up in joint control
with the communists . nenni in turn promised support for italian
participation in nato, although many if not most of nenni's socialists
really want a neutralist italy . quick switch . meeting to ratify the
moro-nenni contract, members of the socialist party central committee
trooped into a basement hall of an ancient roman villa near the bank of
the tiber . from the start, there was trouble . " you say you have an
agreement on regional governments, " shouted a heckler at nenni, " but
you don't say when . " hastily moving on to foreign affairs, nenni told
his grumbling followers that " the atlantic pact is one of the elements
upon which rests a troubled peace a troubled peace, if you like, " he
added quickly, " but one which has avoided the outbreak of war .
at that heresy, there was open revolt
from the pro-communist carristi (literally " tank drivers, " a nickname
derived from the red tanks that crushed the hungarian rebellion) .
alone, they did not have the votes to defeat nenni, but now longtime no
. 2 man riccardo lombardi, eagerly eying the no . 1 spot, also opposed
nenni . the argument raged for 8f hours . by 5 : 30 a.m., nenni was
defeated and the alliance with the christian democrats had collapsed .
the old man submitted his resignation on the spot . it was not
accepted, but that hardly mattered . to president antonio segni, moro
reported that, after 24 days of trying, he would be unable to form a
new leftcenter coalition . communist boss palmiro togliatti was
jubilant over the chaos, called for a popular front government . at the
same time he urged reds to " harvest your neighbors' gardens, " which
meant wooing the divided, demoralized socialists in the wine shops,
factories and fields . liberal leader giovanni malagodi, whose small,
free-enterprise party doubled its share of the vote (from 3.5 per cent
to 7 per cent ) in the april elections, pledged to open the eyes of "
all those italians who are still prisoners of the marxist dream,
including those whom the christian democrats are drawing into socialism
. " as a last resort, segni turned over the task of forming a new
government to the affable president of the chamber of deputies,
giovanni leone, a middle-of-the-road christian democrat and the first
neapolitan premier . like any son of naples, leone enjoys singing ;
with ex-premier amintore fanfani at the piano, he has crooned
neapolitan love songs to such visiting dignitaries as averell harriman
and harold macmillan . short message . after one day, leone succeeded
in forming a government . it was a minority cabinet of 22 christian
democrats, mostly " technicians, " that would stay in office at least
long enough to approve a new budget and to greet president kennedy .
after that, the parliament will recess for the summer while christian
democrats debate whether to gamble on recouping their recent losses by
holding new national elections this fall . sadly, moro wrote an epitaph
for the apertura : " the socialist party drew back because it cannot
conceive of a political line of its own that does not enjoy, directly
or indirectly, the approval of the communist party . today one cannot
count upon the socialist party for the solution of italy's political
problems . /
