israel vale atque ave in jerusalem, halo-haired premier david
ben-gurion, 76, handed in his resignation for the eighth time in his 15
years in office . israel was not unduly disturbed, since ben-gurion is
as famed for resignations as for such other idiosyncrasies as standing
on his head and advocating friendly relations with germans . but what
startled people and politicians this time was the fact that ben-gurion
also gave up his parliamentary seat in the knesset, an act that would
leave him ineligible for future cabinet office . asked why, bengurion
firmly replied, " personal needs . i propose to keep them to myself . "
weary chief . in fact, ben-gurion was weary of politics and disturbed
by a rising generation that questions his leadership . his mapai party
was irrevocably split by the 1960-61 lavon affair, which also tangled
the army in politics. ben-gurion has continually had to arbitrate
disputes and pacify antagonists . finally, he has nearly despaired of
reducing the multiplicity of parties (15 in all), despite his argument
that " if the u.s . with huge population can get along with two
parties, why can't we with only 2,000,000 people ? " b-g " was not
too weary of politics to hand-pick his successor : ukrainianborn
finance minister lev eshkol, 67, who has brought israel from a
hand-tomouth economy to the point where its gross national product has
risen an average of 11 per cent annually over the past five years, and
its dollar surplus is almost an embarrassment . twice married but now a
widower, eshkol has four daughters, one of whom teaches dancing in
jerusalem, while another is a sergeant in the israeli army . his new
cabinet strongly resembles ben-gurion's old one, and it is unlikely
there will be any radical changes in foreign or domestic policy . a far
more adaptable man than ben-gurion, eshkol will probably govern more
through compromise than by fiat . pet project . the governmental
transition might have been uneventful except that, sure enough,
ben-gurion suddenly withdrew his resignation from the knesset, on
condition that he would only attend parliamentary sessions if he felt
like it . neither eshkol nor the opposition politicians were too happy
about ben-gurion's keeping his foot in the door . now, should eshkol
falter or a crisis threaten, ben-gurion might charge back into office
to save the country from alleged disaster . meanwhile, ben-gurion plans
to live at the sde boker kibbutz in the bleak negev desert and turn out
books on everything from jewish history to his own autobiography . he
hopes also to further his pet project : the " cultural absorption " of
jewish immigrants from asia and north africa into israel's
predominantly western society . ben-gurion argues that unless the
oriental jews are educated faster, israel may turn into a typically "
indolent " levantine state within ten years .
israeli defense
minister pinhas lavon was forced from office in 1955 on allegations
that he disastrously bungled an israeli espionage abroad, presumably in
egypt . lavon pleaded that he had been framed by highly placed
political enemies . he was finally cleared two years ago by the israeli
cabinet, over ben-gurion's violent objections .
