communists the place is berlin, the problem is
peking anticipating president kennedy's tumultuous west berlin
reception, nikita khrushchev hastily arranged a trip of his own . he
decided to go to east berlin, ostensibly to celebrate the 70th birthday
of east germany's spadebearded communist boss walter ulbricht . just 48
hours after kennedy, on the west side of the wall, had cried, " i am a
berliner, " khrushchev arrived on the east side, bent on showing that
he was a berliner too . but the thin welcoming crowd was not exactly
eager to make him an honorary citizen . minutes before khrushchev's
turboprop landed at schonefeld airport, an announcer drilled the
spectators in a proper greeting : " now, when our friend steps out of
his plane, we will all cheer in unison, hip, hip, hurrah . " when
nikita stepped out of his plane, all smiles, the crowd was silent and
only the honor guard of soldiers shouted, officially . in contrast to
president kennedy's welcome by more than a million west berliners, a
scant 250,000 east berlin factory workers, secretaries and
schoolchildren, marching in closed formations, turned out for
khrushchev . along parts of the 16-mile route to the red city hall, the
only spectators were the volkspolizei . the real reason for
khrushchev's presence in east berlin, of course, was not that he wanted
to help ulbricht blow out the candles, nor was it entirely a matter of
trying to counteract the emotions stirred up by the kennedy visit .
most of all, khrushchev wanted to meet with his east european satellite
chiefs to close ranks before the chinese arrive in moscow this week to
confer on the worsening sino-soviet ideological split . distribution
problem . their dispute grew so angry last week that moscow resorted to
expelling chinese diplomats, a treatment hitherto reserved for western
representatives . behind this latest explosion was a 24,000-word peking
blast at khrushchev's policies, designed to show that his peaceful
coexistence line is a cowardly betrayal of true red revolutionaries,
that he is shilly-shallying with the " paper tigers " of imperialism,
and that he is " subverting " other communist parties . when the
russians refused to publish the peking letter, issued two weeks ago,
the chinese embassy in moscow started circulating copies, thereby
provoking the kremlin to throw out three embassy attaches and two other
chinese . peking called the action " unreasonable and untenable, "
noted that it was " unprecedented in the history of the relations
between our two socialist countries, " and accused moscow of
deliberately trying to create obstacles to the scheduled talks . even
as khrushchev arrived in east berlin, the chinese embassy there went
right ahead distributing copies of the peking manifesto to interested
bystanders .
stalin's ghost . on
hand for talks with khrushchev in east berlin were the satellite chiefs
of poland, czechoslovakia, hungary and bulgaria . absent, at least from
among early arrivals : rumanian red boss gheorghe gheorghiudej, who is
not only feuding with moscow over economic planning but is warm toward
peking, allowed its manifesto to appear in the rumanian press . what
confronted the small-scale red summit meeting was the picture of the
sino-soviet rift tearing into the communist fabric all over the world .
in moscow, a massive international convocation of female comrades found
the russia-china issue a cause for nearhysteria (see following story) .
such red front organizations as the world federation of trade unions
and the world peace council have also started squabbling over the issue
. in asia, africa and latin america, many communist parties are feeling
the split ; where communism has prospered by appearing " moderate, "
party leaders bluntly denounce red china and are beginning to purge
peking partisans . even in western europe's overwhelmingly pro-moscow
parties, some young reds have responded to peking's revolutionary zeal,
have joined red chinese " friendship societies . " khrushchev himself
busily counterattacked against the chinese . before his berlin trip, at
a central committee meeting in moscow whose chief task was to cope with
the restlessness of russia's own intellectuals, khrushchev dealt with
the more urgent peking problem . typically, he interpreted president
kennedy's " strategy of peace " speech at the american university last
month as a sign of western weakness, used it as evidence that his
policy of peaceful coexistence is paying off . the red chinese, said
khrushchev, are really pessimists in pursuing a now-or-never
revolutionary dogma, because they wouldn't be in such a desperate hurry
to start wars and revolutions if they really believed in the
long-range, inevitable victory of communism . moreover, they use " the
national, racial approach " in widening the schism between communists .
khrushchev also heatedly defended his destalinization drive, attacked
mao tse-tung (without naming him) for building his own cult of
personality . said khrushchev, raising his favorite ghost : " we are
against leaders who believe that they have been sent by god, and that
the people are a mass that must listen only to them and applaud . that
was typical of stalin . " amid these exchanges, the atmosphere could
scarcely be more unpleasant for the scheduled sino-soviet encounter
this week if indeed both parties are not too angry to go through with
it . the split, western observers were careful to point out, was still
not " final and formal . " but as an informal quarrel, it seemed to be
at least in the quarter-finals .
