the women's club the belles and battle-axes of communism gathered
last week at the kremlin for the world women's congress . there were
2,000 delegates from more than a hundred lands . buxom russian comrades
in flowered prints mingled with bantus in striped robes . cute young
chicks from rome and bologna sat next to iron-jawed veterans who had
stuck hatpins in policemen's horses in long-ago street riots in berlin
and buenos aires, melbourne and madrid . some seemed to have gentled
with age . dolores ibarruri, 68, the firebrand who was known as la
pasionaria in the spanish civil war, now looks like someone's kind old
grandmother . others have made the change, at least outwardly, from red
amazons to reasonably fashionable women : slim, touslehaired jeannette
vermeersch, wife of france's red boss maurice thorez, could have
stepped out of the galeries lafayette, if not dior . once-dowdy lotte
ulbricht, married to east germany's lackluster president, could pass as
a well-to-do provincial hausfrau, and india's aruna asaf ali looked
striking in silk, making it hard to believe that as a dedicated
saboteur she once moved the british to put a price of 10,000 rupees on
her head . " our congress is a manifestation of charming womanhood,
motherly warmth, moral and physical beauty ! " gushed la pasionaria,
quite a little off the mark . above all, the congress was a
manifestation of the ever-widening sinosoviet split . italian flight .
as usual, the dispute was between the khrushchev line, which holds that
to avoid nuclear disaster capitalism must be fought through peaceful
means, and the mao tse-tung line, which demands an aggressive policy,
even at the risk of war . coming on in the first session at the
kremlin's modern hall of congresses, japan's kimono-clad fuki kushida
demanded the withdrawal of u.s . " aggressive forces " from south viet
nam, formosa, okinawa, africa, latin america and the middle east . in a
simpler period of communist history, this might have passed almost
unnoticed as the standard line, east or west . but now there was a
sudden movement on the floor, and out of the hall stalked 50 of the
finest, most peace-loving italian females ever gathered in one bunch at
the kremlin . what was bothering them ? a trim roman blonde explained
: " we are here as women to work for peace and not to engage in cold
war polemics . " more to the point, japan's communist party is one of
those aligned with red china, and italy's red ladies were unmistakably
showing their solidarity with comrade nikita in the sino-soviet fight .
red china's yang yun-yu returned the ball to the soviets by lashing the
u.s . for using nuclear blackmail " to enslave the world, " attacking
john kennedy for his cunning " strategy " to divide china and the
soviet union, and insisting that the foremost problem was not peaceful
coexistence but maintaining the active struggle against imperialism . "
how, " she demanded, " can the oppressed coexist with their oppressors
? " lotte ulbricht replied that madame yang was way off base . no one
was demanding that oppressed nations live happily with their
oppressors, she said, and added that russia was, as always, "
wholeheartedly behind the revolutionary struggles of colonial peoples .
/ on the third day, india's aruna asaf ali charged china with blocking
all efforts to settle the himalayan war with india . out of their seats
bounced two diminutive chinese delegates who legged it to the platform
in slit skirts to demand time for rebuttal, their heated words duly
translated by an interpreter . a russian official frantically wrapped
her hands around the microphone ; british chairman dr . joan carritt
vainly jangled a bell ; pro-soviet delegates added to the uproar by
shouting that the chinese should stand down . male wall . the only
people paying attention to the bitter chinese complaints were a group
of western newsmen . the sight of outsiders overhearing the family
quarrel brought fiery jeannette vermeersch to her feet and, pointing an
accusing finger, she cried to the chinese delegates : " you are
talking in front of the imperialist press and yet you say that you are
fighting imperialism ! " strong-armed russian males formed a human
wall between the reporters and the chinese as the exasperated chairman
adjourned the meeting . the role of peacemaker fell to guinea's jeanne
martin, president of the panafrican women's conference, who got the
chinese ladies off the platform by promising them a later chance to
speak . despite all those ideological differences, a non-communist male
who has ever had anything to do with a women's organization could not
escape the uncomfortable feeling that the red ladies were acting
somewhat like organization women . at week's end the mood grew beyond
even predictable feminine excitement . the congress went into secret
session, hoping to hammer out its differences behind closed doors . the
attempt failed . when the majority agreed on an appeal for peace and
against the arms race, but failed to denounce the u.s . or nato, the
chinese delegates and their albanian allies voted against, and remained
stubbornly seated while the crowd of 5,000 jumped to their feet, waved
handkerchiefs and clapped rhythmically in a 50-minute demonstration .
china's madame yang then mounted the podium to explain her vote, but
was drowned out by angry shouts and finally ruled out of order .
