great britain while the prisoner sketched in
jail, he lived like the prince of ponces . for 56[ a day, he was able
under british prison regulations to get a cell with a soft bed, a
carpet on the concrete floor, curtains on the barred window, an
armchair, and another prisoner to clean up after him . during the three
weeks stephen ward was in jail, john profumo had been disgraced, evgeny
ivanov expelled from the communist party and packed off to a russian
mental hospital, and christine keeler successfully screen-tested for
the proposed " dramatized documentary " of her life . but last week
artist-osteopath ward, the fourth member of what labor party leader
harold wilson eloquently called " this dingy quadrilateral, " at last
held center stage . handcuffed and wearing sunglasses, ward stuck his
tongue out at photographers as he was led into london's marylebone
magistrates' court for a hearing to decide whether his case should be
referred to the old bailey for trial . the charge : eight counts of
procuring, living off the earnings of prostitutes, running a brothel
and arranging abortions . in his opening statement, prosecutor mervyn
griffith-jones warned that the hearing would unfold a " somewhat sordid
story . " it was sordid all right and more than somewhat . see jim . a
parade of girls tall, short, blond, brunette, redheaded took the stand
. but, inevitably, the star witnesses were christine keeler and marilyn
( " mandy " ) rice-davies . during christine's testimony, ward quietly
sketched her from the dock . christine said that between lovers of her
own, she would stay platonically with ward at his wimpole mews flat . "
we were like brother and sister, " she said, but fraternally, ward kept
her supplied with men . " my life used to revolve around stephen from
the moment i got up until the moment i went to bed, " she said . " i
thought i could never stand on my feet unless he was there to support
me mentally . " ward told her it was all right for a girl to sleep with
a man for money as long as she did not get the " prostitute mentality .
/ though payment for services ranged up to $140, half of which usually
went to ward, she said : " i have never considered myself a call girl
or prostitute . " sometimes when ward " complained about having no
money, " christine testified, she would simply say : " i'll go see jim
. " he was a wealthy businessman, who had paid her " hundreds of
pounds, " but the name might well have been jack . profumo also gave
her money, " but not for myself ; it was for my mother . " miss x .
christine said that she took up modeling so that she could keep meeting
girls to introduce to ward . often when she and ward were out walking,
/ he used to tell me which girl he liked in a shop and say " go and get
her . " ' christine would introduce the girls to ward under the guise
that he was her brother or that he wanted to sketch them . ward would
then seduce the girls and later discuss their talents with christine .
/ he used to say " that was wonderful, " ' she said . " she's good,
she's not bad, she's fantastic,' something like that .
while the
prisoner sketched add as griffith-jones and his witnesses told it, ward
was occasionally turned down . once a shopgirl balked when he wanted
her to go to a party " where she would see girls tied up and whipped .
/ another time, ward told a " young lady of the utmost respectability,
/ said the prosecutor, that he had a two-way mirror in his flat through
which one could see into the bedroom from the living room, added he
hoped to make money from people who would pay to watch . taking the
stand herself later, the girl a tall brunette wearing ski pants,
identified only as a certain " miss x " recalled telling ward that she
was not in the least interested in watching that kind of thing . " my
darling, " ward replied, " i don't want you to watch . i want you to
perform . " always bill . perhaps the most extraordinary thing about
all this was the unlikely association between ward and his aristocratic
friend, viscount astor . christine startled the jammed courtroom by
testifying that when she and mandy were once sharing a flat, their rent
was partly paid by none other than astor himself . son of combative,
convivial nancy astor, britain's first woman m.p., young astor grew up
at the center of britain's social and political worlds . his uncle is
proprietor of the london times, his brother editor of the observer .
the " cliveden set " was famed in the '30s not only for its appeasing
politics but its intellectual sparkle ; and charming, generous bill
astor tried to carry on the tradition . his celebrated parties freely
mixed writers, artists, politicians and aristocrats . but the
thrice-married astor (currently to bronwen pugh, former top london
model) was never really intellectually attuned to his sophisticated
circle, which is perhaps why he allowed ward to penetrate the fringes
of the cliveden set and rented him a cottage on the grounds . the
worlds of the astors and of ward frequently overlapped in the garden
and at the swimming pool, where bill astor often seemed to have more
fun than with his own respectable guests . in her testimony, mandy said
that she had slept with astor . ward always said, mandy declared, that
though he did not have any money, " we have always got bill, who can
help us . " under crossexamination, mandy was told that astor had
denied her allegation . she replied quickly : " he would, wouldn't he
?
in a letter to the times, the
head of one london model school protested against " the new and grossly
unfair newspaper practice of calling any woman a " model' who so
describes herself and so libeling the profession . with far more
justification than the newspapers have shown, the model girls of this
agency are now referring to miss keeler as the " wellknown journalist .
