sweden gentleman spy the tall, coldly handsome swedish aviator
was a familiar figure on the washington cocktail circuit . as swedish
air attache from 1952 to 1957, he impressed one u.s . air force general
as " easy and outgoing, an extravert who got along very well . " west
pointers found him " spoony " meaning suave . he played a cool, quiet
game of golf at the army-navy club, his balding, white-fringed head
bent over his putter as generals and admirals chatted . his
conversation was hardly memorable, except that he worried aloud and a
lot about radicals and leftists . when he went home, the u.s .
government presented him with the customary legion of merit for his "
furtherance of amicable relationships between the royal swedish air
force and the u.s . air force . " last week, as colonel stig erik
constans wennerstrom, 56, awaited trial as a soviet spy, it was
suddenly clear that his relationships had been most amicable east of
the iron curtain . what damage ? when swedish agents arrested him, he
admitted he had been on the soviet payroll for a full 15 years not only
as an air attache but after 1957 as chief of the air section in the
swedish ministry of defense, and since 1961 as a foreign ministry
consultant . though he drew only $9,000 annual pay, he lived in a
$40,000 house in stockholm's exclusive djursholm district, among bank
directors and diplomats, entertained frequently . money was a motive
(he may have earned as much as $100,000 for his work), but one
acquaintance said : " he must have enjoyed the dangerous game and
thought he was intellectually better than others . " what damage could
wennerstrom's game have done to the u.s., nato, and his own country ?
though sweden is not a nato member, wennerstrom had contact with danish
and norwegian military men, probably knew a lot about the nato defenses
and weapons . he also knew swedish defense sites and strengths, had
access to key mobilization and communication plans . in washington, he
had access among other things, to detailed information on the u.s .
army's hawk, radar-guided antiaircraft missile designed to knock down
low-flying supersonic planes . the russians are working hard to perfect
a defense against low-level nuclear attack, and the hawk could help
them . more proof ? swedish minister of defense sven andersson was
suspicious of wennerstrom for two years prior to his arrest, but
premier tage erlander was not informed until after agents had picked up
wennerstrom on the way to his office . as opposition critics pounced,
erlander went on television to explain : " it is impossible for the
government to be informed of every person who is under suspicion . we
need more proof in a democratic society before we can take action . "
it sounded like a lame excuse to liberals and conservatives, who
demanded a parliamentary investigation . meanwhile, always the
gentleman, wennerstrom reportedly asked his attorney to send back his
legion of merit, calmly faced a probable life sentence for " gross
espionage .
