france the - brotherhood the grandeur that is gaullism has
always defied simple explanation, for it often seems that charles de
gaulle, like the cabots, speaks only to god . in a witty new book, the
gaullists ritual and directory, french journalist pierre
viansson-ponte, chief political correspondent for prestigious le monde,
pokes skillfully at the inner gaullist mysteries . the movement,
vianssonponte concludes, " consists neither of a doctrine nor of an
organization, but simply of an experience lived through . " the high
mass, sung . the most telling experience for gaullists is to be in de
gaulle's presence, which is surrounded by an inflexible liturgy .
guardian of the " christian morality and social propriety " of the
ritual is mme . de gaulle . " she checks the necklines of the
ministers' wives, " says author vianssonponte, " and has at various
times, it is said, succeeded in keeping out of the government people
suspected of marital infidelity . " at luncheon at de gaulle's country
home in colombey-les-deuxeglises, " mme . de gaulle asks about the
road, talks about the weather,the general . the general asks about the
road,talks about the weather, himself . " with its planted questions
and prepared answers, a de gaulle press conference is like " a high
mass, sung . " the resignation of a gaullist who has outlived his
usefulness is " an order ; it is not disputed . " what is remarkable
about all this, says viansson-ponte, is that although de gaulle has
absolute power, he does not abuse it . that may help to explain the
loyalty of his followers, bound together only by their participation in
at least two of gaullism's three great adventures : the free french
resistance ; de gaulle's postwar rassemblement du peuple francais
(r.p.f.) and its abortive bid for political power ; and the formation
of the fifth republic . viansson-ponte estimates that only 1,500
frenchmen qualify as real gaullists, has selected 116 of these for
inclusion in his directory . even in apostasy, he says, the gaullist "
link is indestructible . excluded, exiled, in rebellion, jacques
soustelle remains a member of the circle . " but ironically, such
ranking spokesmen for present-day gaullist policy as foreign minister
maurice couve de murville and information minister alain peyrefitte are
excluded for lacking the proper credentials . crossing the desert .
viansson-ponte gives each gaullist a guide michelin sort of rating
denoting past services to gaullism and present standing in relation to
the general . a cross of lorraine indicates free france, a submachine
gun the resistance, and a star the compagnon de la liberation, the
elite order of free france and resistance fighters . a small outhouse
(cabinet in french) means membership in de gaulle's personal office
staff, a mask means espionage work during world war ii . a motorcyclist
symbolizes trips to colombey to see the general, and a hand grenade
membership in the r.p.f . why the grenade symbol ? " because the
r.p.f . aimed to blow up the fourth republic . " an open door indicates
audiences with de gaulle, and an ear tags the man who has been summoned
to a consultation . an armchair designates a cabinet minister (a
slashed rosette signifies former government officials), a stool a
senator, a straight-backed chair a deputy, a bench a dignitary of the
fifth republic . two hobnailed boots signify membership in the gaullist
u.n.r., one hobnailed boot stands for the slightly leftist but gaullist
u.d.t., a rubber boot for other gaullist movements whose members were
forced to wade through the general's rhetoric . a mess kit marks the
men who took jobs under the fourth republic ( " i suppose they had to
eat, " said de gaulle) . a tank indicates participation in the army
revolt that overthrew the fourth republic in 1958, and a camel marks
those " faithful during the crossing of the desert " the parched years
when de gaulle was out of power . author viansson-ponte's guide to the
leading gaullists : jacques chaban-delmas, president of the national
assembly, a " talleyrand /
who is all things to all men, he has been an r.p.f . leader, minister
of the fourth republic, " a schemer to overthrow parliamentary
traditions, " and now " repository and guardian of these same
traditions . " michel debre, former premier, resigned in 1962, now a
deputy in the national assembly from reunion island,
he is the regime's specialist in sacrifice, an
ardent believer in algerie francaise upon whom de gaulle thrust the
burden of selling algerian independence . " this was too much . he was
like a cardinal who had lost his faith but who had to feign mystic
fervor out of loyalty and fidelity . " louis joxe, minister of state
for administrative reform, architect of the algerian peace at evian,
/ he has more than once
brushed with heresy, " but his quiet administrative and diplomatic
skill make him one of de gaulle's favorite troubleshooters . his
present minor ministry " serves only as a pretext . from time to time,
one confers on him a delicate dossier,an international mission, an
imbroglio to resolve . " andre malraux, minister of culture,
/ the saint-just of de gaulle's
revolution . "  his role was " to strike the popular imagination . "
but now malraux is little more than a glamorous ornament . " he is no
longer the burning and prestigious genius who disturbs and seduces, the
enfant terrible of gaullism . this is the old uncle whose passing whims
are tolerated with amused indulgence, because in the eyes of the
neighbors he honors the family . " francois mauriac, novelist,
/ he is first of all a polemicist,
the best of the epoch . homage goes directly from the prince of letters
to the sovereign . he has written of de gaulle : " there is a man who
is sure of his eternity . " ' georges pompidou, premier,
/ grand duke of the realm, the man whom
the king would have made his richelieu . " successively professor,
banker, politician, pompidou may be in danger from his own
dream one day of succeeding de gaulle . " but he should
be careful . he is not the only one who dreams of this .
saint-just (1767-94) was robespierre's most
zealous flack during the french revolution, organized the reign of
terror for all heretics, in the end lost his head himself .
