japan from the cow-walk to the brawl ever since its founding 73
years ago, the japanese diet has had a hard time distinguishing between
robert's rules of order and those of the marquis of queensberry . just
as the typhoons come to japan in september, and the cherry blossoms in
april, the parliamentary brawling season arrives in june, filling the
diet with the sound of crashing fists and strangled curses . this year
the season arrived on schedule . more than secretaries . before world
war ii, brawling was a common practice among hot-blooded delegates who,
in the samurai tradition, were really hankering for medieval days when
political differences were settled with the sword . throughout the diet
building, the major conservative parties stationed flying squads of
young toughs, known ironically as ingaidan (lobbyists), always ready
for heckling or fighting . during the postwar years, the u.s . tried to
enforce good behavior, but the quiet spell ended with the lifting of
the occupation . though the ingaidan were gone, diet members hired
heavy-fisted brawlers as " secretaries . " a big riot in june 1954
injured some 50 persons, forced liberal premier shigeru yoshida to
cancel a long-planned trip to the u.s . and apologize to the emperor .
survivors of that fight recall the arrival of an opposition leader,
bukichi ( " big badger " ) miki, who vehemently objected to western
dress and always wore a kimono . he showed up for the fight dressed in
army fatigues and combat boots, explained to colleagues that " you
can't kick with a kimono on, you know . " since then, japan's emergent
socialists have introduced a whole new array of techniques, many more
or less nonviolent . the most popular is ushi aruki, or cow-walking .
realizing that they cannot block the overwhelming conservative
majority, the socialists do their best to slow business to a standstill
. in balloting sessions, each socialist member gets up slowly as his
name is called, shuffles toward the rostrum with the shortest steps
possible . where it takes 230 conservatives only 15 minutes to vote,
120 socialists consume as much as an hour and a half . cow-walking is
combined with sitdown strikes in diet corridors, deliberate traffic
jams, boycotts, and picketing to prevent the speaker from taking his
seat . through these tactics, the socialists force allnight sessions,
hoping that the wornout government men will have to give in somewhere
along the line . not enough bodies . this year, with a backlog of 66
bills still stalled in committee, premier ikeda ordered his men to push
them through before the diet session closes july 6 . when the
government party recently used its majority to force a vote on a
controversial relief-law revision, cow-walking was no longer enough .
fists and ashtrays started to fly . battling lawmakers shouted : "
respect parliamentary procedures ! " the brawling later spread to the
cabinet committee, where five bills were stalled . socialists massed
around the committeeroom door to prevent chairman tadanori nagayama
from entering . a flying wedge of burly conservative " secretaries "
smashed through, carrying the aging, anemia-weakened chairman in with
them . as the vote was hurriedly taken, socialists screamed " fascist
dictatorship ! " and charged . in the melee, chairman nagayama
disappeared, was rescued ten minutes later by diet guards who found him
bruised and bleeding on the floor . he was rushed to a hospital . " we
won't have enough bodies to go around if people get injured every time
a controversial bill comes up, " said yutaro takeyama, head of the
government party's strategy committee . " we will just have to appoint
stronger men to committee chairmanships, men who won't get put out of
action every time the going gets rough . /
