south viet nam the heart of quang duc heads bowed, palms pressed
together in prayer, thousands of buddhists filed quietly through
saigon's xa loi pagoda last week to witness what most of them believed
to be a miracle . amid the fragrance of incense-burning reeds,
yellowrobed priests chanted from sunrise to midnight, laymen gazed in
awe, and weeping women held children up to see it all . on the altar,
inside a crystal urn, which in turn was encased in a bouquetflanked
glass chest, lay the object of their reverence a charred piece of flesh
. under it a hand-lettered sign announced : " the eternal heat of high
priest quang duc . " two weeks earlier, to dramatize the buddhist
majority's fight for greater religious freedom under south viet nam's
roman catholic president ngo dinh diem, a 73-year-old buddhist monk
named thich quang duc had spectacularly set himself afire in a saigon
street . later the martyr's scorched remains were assigned to final
cremation in a rice field outside the capital . but, as the priests
told it, when the old man's ashes were removed from the oven, his heart
emerged miraculously undestroyed obviously the supernatural work of
buddha . immediately, his fellow monks proclaimed quang duc a saint .
skeptics suggested the quang duc's heart had been removed from the body
before cremation, or had been injected with a fire-resisting fluid .
certainly the phenomenon was far from original ; down through the
ages, in legend and fact, the hearts of heroic figures have more than
once withstood the flames. but the " miracle " serves the buddhists in
their two-month-old war with diem . thanks partly to pressure from the
u.s., which fears that massive buddhist disaffection could wreck south
viet nam's long, vital campaign against the communists, the diem
government signed a compromise agreeing to let the buddhists fly their
own flag and promising to ease anti-buddhist discrimination e regime
fails to show good faith, the buddhists vow, they will start new
demonstrations and they are counting on the symbol of quang duc's
durable heart to help keep the faithful inspired .
when gautama buddha's body was
cremated, tradition has it, some parts of it failed to burn . joan of
arc's heart is said to have survived her burning at the stake and been
thrown into the seine . when percy bysshe shelley drowned off italy in
1822, three literary friends lord byron, edward john trelawny and leigh
hunt cremated the corpse on a pyre of driftwood . the job almost done,
trelawny suddenly thrust in his arm and snatched out the heart, which,
although fiery hot, was strangely unconsumed . in oscar wilde's fairy
tale, the happy prince, the statue's broken heart fails to melt in the
furnace .
