communists the confrontation a troupe of patagonian jugglers
would have received a warmer welcome from the kremlin . not a single
soviet reporter or photographer was on hand when the men from peking
appeared at moscow airport ; pravda did not even mention their arrival.
after months of invective, accusations and counteraccusations, the
great confrontation between soviet and chinese party delegations was
finally at hand . east and west watched the showdown or what could be
seen of it with equal fascination .  although nikita khrushchev suddenly
discovered urgent business in kiev, the kremlin was stiffly correct
about it all, sent out its chief dialectician, lanky, austere mikhail
suslov, to meet the visitors . head of peking's seven-man mission :
teng hsiao-ping, secretarygeneral of the chinese communist party . as
teng stepped out of a soviet tu-104 jet, a crowd of chinese residents
in moscow, watched closely by a chinese army colonel, sent up a cheer .
suslov smiled, stepped forward and shook teng's hand . but the russian
omitted the usual brief welcoming address, instead politely suggested
that teng might like a two-hour rest before getting down to business .
when a chinese delegate remarked on the chilly 57o temperature, a
muscovite red replied : " we hope it will get warmer . " fresh insults.
in one sense, things undoubtedly got warmer when both sides met
behind the massive walls of a rarely used mansion in the lenin hills
section of moscow . suslov and teng exchanged toasts, but that was just
routine . for under the pose of politeness, the sino-soviet quarrel was
becoming ruder than ever . without explanation, peking suddenly
withdrew its two entries from an international film festival about to
open in moscow . and just before the party leaders met, khrushchev and
mao tse-tung exchanged a fresh round of insults over red china's
25-point denunciation of soviet policy . although the soviets
themselves refused to publish it, moscow complained last week that
chinese agents handed out the document in cities from odessa to
leningrad and even in the atomic research center of dubna, near moscow.
chinese crews on the peking-moscow express scattered bundles of the
manifesto through coach windows, used the train's public-address system
to read the chinese charges to the captive soviet audience . after
moscow expelled three chinese diplomats for having a hand in this
extraordinary circulation campaign, peking ostentatiously welcomed them
home with bouquets of flowers . at the same time, the chinese condemned
the soviet move as a violation of its right, as a government, to
circulate statements abroad . nonsense, replied the soviets . what gave
the chinese the idea that they could " behave as though they were in
one of the provinces of china ? " such tactics, fumed the kremlin,
were plainly a violation of soviet sovereignty : " it is obvious that
instead of searching for ways to a rapprochement, the chinese
leadership aims at aggravating differences . " equally matched . if
that was peking's purpose, it could find no better man than teng .
short, stocky, in his 60s, teng was believed badly crippled in the
chinese civil war, still has a limp and a nervous tic when he speaks
which does not keep him from speaking often and abrasively . no
stranger to the russians, he attended two previous moscow meetings on
the split in 1957 and in 1960 . a veteran of mao's long march to yenan
in the 1930s, teng came to prominence as a political commissar in the
army, since 1952 has risen to a place among the top four or five men in
red china's hierarchy . in prestige and personality he is a match for
suslov, 60, who for years was stalin's ideological mouthpiece, and now
supplies khrushchev with the theoretical justifications for political
strategy . inevitably, western diplomats speculated whether the red
chinese and the soviets would sever party connections or diplomatic
relations, carry the feud to a summit session of world communist
leaders, or merely agree to continue to be disagreeable . whatever
happened, the gravest schism in the history of communism was at hand .
