what they
are fighting about
at its simplest,
the russian-chinese quarrel is over what strategy to follow toward the
ultimate victory of communism and over who shall be in charge of
operations . but beneath this there lies a far deeper split : the
split between communist theory and human reality . ever since karl marx
predicted that the revolution would break out in industrially advanced
western europe, while it actually came in backward, agricultural
russia, such contradictions have haunted communism . today, according
to marxist theory, capitalism should be in its death throes, the
working class in utter misery, and the former colonial peoples well on
the road to communism . instead, capitalism is thriving, western
workers are going middle-class, and the ex-colonies tend toward
socialism but hardly toward communism . nikita khrushchev favors
changing the theory to fit these facts more closely ; he is, as peking
accurately charges, a revisionist . mao tse-tung favors changing the
facts to fit the theory ; he is, as moscow says, a dogmatist . but
both are also realists, motivated by different national interests,
different economies, and different histories . khrushchev, the ruler of
a nation that has at last begun to gain some material rewards, argues
that people are not interested in war or revolution but in peaceful
prosperity, and that rocketrattling will only drive millions away from
communism . mao, ruler of a country with a lot less to lose, master of
a peasantry whose appetites demand a bowl of rice, not a tv set or a
car, replies in effect that he is not running a popularity contest with
the west . power cannot be won by wooing adherents but by fighting for
it otherwise communism will atrophy . from the golden horde to yenan
marxism pretends that it raises people above race and nation, but
moscow and peking are divided by racial hostility and memories of
conflict, which would persist even if ideological differences could be
ironed out . russia has never forgotten the golden horde of genghis
khan, which swept west from mongolia in the 13th century, conscripting
volga boatmen into the khan's army and forcing local princes to kowtow.
when, after 200 years, the mongol empire collapsed, the newly united
russians lost no time in getting even . " wehre is china ? " asked
czar mikhail romanov . " is it rich ? what can we lay claim to ? "
russian claims (manchuria, outer mongolia, sinkiang) caused friction
for centuries, down to the present . as late as 1949, when the chinese
reds had virtually conquered the mainland from the nationalists, moscow
was still dickering for territorial concessions . the chinese still
sneer at the russians as " big noses " and consider them as alien as
other westerners . moreover, the population pressure along the
sino-soviet border is a constant menace to moscow ; by 1980 there will
be 1 billion chinese . when a british visitor suggested to khrushchev
not long ago that the chinese masses would eventually explode north
into siberia or south to australia, nikita replied grimly : " i'm in
favor of australia . " from the start, russian national interests also
shaped moscow's attitude toward the chinese communists . in the 1920s,
stalin ruthlessly sacrificed mao's communist movement to chiang
kaishek, whom he supported because he considered him a strong soviet
ally who would fight both western and japanese threats to russian power.
decimated by chiang, the ragged chinese communists survived in the
caves of yenan and eventually went on to conquer china, despite
stalin's warning that they were backward and not ready for revolution .
after the war, stalin sent mao a russian handbook of partisan strategy
against the nazis ; mao passed it to an aide who snorted : " if we
had this as our textbook we would have been annihilated ten years ago .
thus mao was beholden
no one, least of all stalin, for his victory . yet ironically, the
first open ideological crack in the moscow-peking partnership came over
khrushchev's 1956 denunciation of stalin . from " secret speech " to
sputnik mao had sent a message to the 20th party congress lavishly
praising the dead dictator . without bothering to consult the chinese,
khrushchev delivered his famed " secret speech " to the congress, in
which he suddenly unmasked stalin as a megalomanical tyrant . peking
was stunned . mao felt correctly, as was proved a few months later by
the uprisings in poland and hungary that the destalinization drive
would touch off a wave of unrest . even though stalin had bullied and
betrayed the chinese communists (as well as helped them, at a price,
during the korean war), mao believed in stalin's principle of
centralized rule, preferred a stable red empire to one in ferment . the
chinese communist party central committee hastily called a secret
session ; a month later, red china defiantly announced that, despite
what the kremlin had to say, stalin's achievements outweighed his
errors . on foreign policy peking agreed for the moment to back
khrushchev's talk of peaceful coexistence with the west, since mao
himself was then energetically pushing the " bandung spirit " of sweet
neighborliness in asia . even this qualified support for the kremlin
disappeared when, in august 1957, the soviet union test-fired its first
icbm and two months later launched sputnik . russian rocketry, peking
decided, for the first time in history gave the communist camp military
superiority over the west ; the reds must now seize the advantage by
fomenting revolutions in underdeveloped nations, even at the risk of
war . instead, khrushchev pursued a detente with the west . in 1958 he
agreed to a moratorium on nuclear testing in the atmosphere (broken in
1961), partly designed to freeze out peking as an atomic power . when
the chinese wanted russian atomic cover for a move against the offshore
islands and formosa, moscow refused . from great leap to great brawl
meanwhile, the russians did not seem eager to help their chinese
brothers with their growing internal economic difficulties . while
khrushchev wooed neutralist india and egypt with aid, and even brought
his moneybags on a pilgrimage to that renegade red, tito, not an
additional ruble was allotted to mao . the red chinese used the only
surplus raw material at their command : people . millions of peasants
were herded into people's communes and hitched to plows . peking broke
up families, tried to ban money, jerry-built hundreds of " backyard "
steel furnaces . the slogan was : " communism can grow grain and make
steel . " through brawn and " revolutionary romanticism " china was to
turn almost overnight into an industrialized land . the great leap
forward was hailed as a short cut to communism and a slap at moscow .
khrushchev warned that it could not be done . after a few months the
experiment indeed collapsed . gloating over the failure, khrushchev
told visiting hubert humphrey that mao's idea had been foolishly "
utopian . " by the time nikita showed up in peking in 1959, fresh from
his tour of the u.s . and the meeting with ike at camp david, he was
barely on speaking terms with his hosts . the airport was decorated
with huge posters of stalin ; on the way to town, khrushchev and mao
began an argument that lasted for the next four days . when the soviet
ruler left, not even the niceties of a formal communique were observed.
by early 1960 mao had clearly
given up hope of persuading khrushchev to change his flexible cold war
policy, and began an all-out chinese offensive designed to topple
khrushchev from power . it was also the start of an endless argument
about whether authority for moscow's " peaceful coexistence " or
peking's " inevitability of war " could be found in the sacred lenin
texts . actually lenin, and even stalin, had argued both ways at
various times, depending on conditions and moscow pointed out that
conditions were certainly different in the nuclear age . when mao's men
carried the attack into a meeting of world communist leaders in
bucharest in june, khrushchev was incensed . " one cannot mechanically
repeat what lenin said decades ago, " he shouted . " we live in a time
when neither marx nor engels nor lenin is with us . if we act like
children who study the alphabet by building words out of letters, we
shall not get very far . " a full-dress summit session of 81 communist
parties in moscow in november 1960 produced a statement (adopted
unanimously, of course) that merely lumped together these diametrically
opposed opinions . then last fall, the red chinese invasion of india
only served to justify khrushchev's view that mao was a reckless
fanatic, and moscow ostentatiously failed to back peking . as for
khrushchev's withdrawal of soviet missiles from cuba, the maneuver
confirmed mao's worst fears about vacillating kremlin leadership,
leaning first to " adventurism, " then to " capitulationism . "
thundered peking : " it is 100 per cent appeasement . a munich pure
and simple . imperialism is only a paper tiger . " to which khrushchev
replied : " the paper tiger has nuclear teeth . only a madman would
speak of a new world war . " and that is essentially where the argument
still stands . from vision to danger time was when western skeptics
wondered whether the sino-soviet split was real . khrushchev, they
figured, might be relatively nice to the west only long enough to
wangle some concessions on nato or nuclear arms control ; then mao
would step in and together they would demolish the free world . today
it is inconceivable that the quarrel is merely an act . in fact, there
is a growing vision shared by such disparate prophets as arnold toynbee
and charles de gaulle of russia and the west some day standing together
as allies against china . stranger things have happened in history .
yet the vision has its dangers . the west has almost imperceptibly
moved into a new era of softness toward communism . few any longer talk
of defeating communism ; coexistence is more or less accepted in the
west . this may be only realistic in the nuclear age . but all over the
west there is a creeping notion that khrushchev's kind of communism can
be lived with that only peking's is really bad and this has taken much
steam out of the anti-communist position . nikita's " reasonable "
approach has helped the italian reds gain strength, has revived dreams
of a new popular front among once solidly anti-communist french
socialists, has even prompted belgian foreign minister paul henri spaak
to say that the removal of u.s . nuclear stockpiles from western europe
might not be such a bad idea after all . these are only modest red
gains . but khrushchev can point to them to argue plausibly that he is
not nearly so bad a communist strategist as peking makes him out to be
