western europe the unvisit arriving in bonn just 13 days after
president kennedy's triumphant visit, charles de gaulle made no effort
to enter a popularity contest . both french and germans legitimately
emphasized that the two-day trip was only a " working visit " as
stipulated by the brand-new franco-german friendship treaty . as far as
protocol and the public were concerned, it was even a kind of unvisit
no parades, no crowds . the bonn press predicted that de gaulle would
try to whip the germans into line in case they had got too friendly
toward the u.s . he was not as crude as that . but he had been stung by
kennedy's frankfurt speech about atlantic unity (although dismissing it
as " salade, salade, salade " ), and de gaulle obviously wanted to find
out in bonn if the germans had been sufficiently impressed by it to
move away from the franco-german alliance . answer : the germans were
just about standing still . they chided de gaulle and his top ministers
for the announced withdrawal of french naval units from the nato fleet
but did not press him on the question of britain's eventual admission
to the common market . there was some haggling on agriculture ;
because of a price-depressing agricultural surplus, which caused farm
riots in southern france last week, the french had just closed their
borders to imports of tomatoes and apricots, without notifying the
common market . the only really substantive agreement : a massive
youth exchange program . among other things, de gaulle wanted to get to
know vice chancellor ludwig erhard, the man who will take over from
konrad adenauer next fall . they had an hour's " friendly /
actually, they talked past each other . de gaulle kept stressing the
mystique of europe, while erhard tried to talk economics but found that
the general was as little interested in such matters as the chancellor.
as for the franco-german treaty, de gaulle managed to sound both
hopeful and casual . " treaties, " he said with a shrug, " are like
roses and young girls . they last while they last . /
