world law " for civilized existence " someone once asked solon
how justice could be achieved in athens . " it can be achieved, "
replied the great lawmaker, in substance, " if those people who are not
directly affected by a wrong are just as indignant about it as those
who are personally hurt . " this generalized passion for justice has
always been a hard standard to live up to, but u.s . chief justice earl
warren cited it last week to set the theme for a major international
meeting of jurists that convened last week in solon's city . formal
title : " first world conference on world peace through law . "
ceremonially welcomed by the king and queen of greece in the marble
halls of the athens hilton were 1,000 jurists from 105 nations . the
conference was the culmination of a movement launched five years ago by
world-lawman charles sylvanus rhyne, past president of the american bar
association, and followed a series of preparatory sessions in costa
rica,
japan, nigeria and italy . said rhyne in his keynote
address : " we share one great ideal which transcends our diversity a
belief that in the rule of law lies the route to world peace . " world
law, rhyne cautioned, should not be thought of as " a dramatic panacea
or cure-all for the world's ills, but rather a patient labor demanding
immense and constant effort to develop the true basis for civilized
progress and existence . " suggested improvements . henry r . luce,
editor in chief of time inc., recalled the biblical passage, " blessed
are the peacemakers " and pointed out :
peace has to be made . peace cannot merely be kept not for
long by force of arms . neither will peace be given to us as an
undeserved gift from heaven . overwhelmingly, peace is the work of
justice, and the work of justice is mainly the work of the law . " luce
urged his listeners to carry the case for world law " to all
politicians and to all the governments of the world . " said he : " so
far as i know, no president or prime minister has put the rule of law
at the top of his political banner, " but the " rule of law can become
good politics . " in six days of deliberations, the jurists modestly
began " the work of the law " by surveying the world's existing legal
framework and making suggestions for improvement . main conclusions : .the
united nations . really to be " mankind's best hope for a peaceful
world, " it needs more muscle . u.n . peace-keeping efforts should be
codified, a permanent " peace police force " created, and the security
council enlarged . the conference recommended partial abolition of the
veto : henceforth it should not be permitted when a dispute can be
settled peacefully . but there was plainly no desire to get involved in
the touchy issue of u.n . financing . .the world court . with most
states (the u.s . included) reserving the right to ignore its
jurisdiction, it has rendered only 13 final verdicts in its 18 years .
more nations should bow to it, suggested the athens meeting . the court
should be empowered to hear cases between individuals as well as states
; and the possibility of " regional world courts " should be explored.
.foreign investment & trade . both should be protected by a framework
of more efficient law . statutes on foreign investment should be
codified, and special courts considered for settling disputes .
national committees of lawyers should be set up to study the legal
machinery for trade, and improved policing of international patents . .
space . the newest frontier provoked more questions than
recommendations . where does airspace (over which nations exert
sovereignty) end, and outer space (which no country has yet claimed)
begin ? are the moon and planets open domain like columbus' new
world, where the hoisting of flag and cross was sufficient to establish
sovereignty ? on the latter, the conference said no that the u.n .
should be granted sovereignty over all objects of outer space, no
matter which nation's spaceships land on them first . delegates further
suggested adoption of " the principle of liability for injury from
space accidents, " urged an international conference to forge a body of
space law . salvation proclamation . at week's end, these similar
topics were adopted as a " global work program . " the jurists also 1)
agreed to found a world peace through law center, to be organized by
rhyne, which will serve as a research clearinghouse for all the world's
legal systems, 2) set in motion plans for a world rule of law year, 3)
drew up a " proclamation of athens, " stating their case before world
opinion . " this conference, " said the proclamation, " being deeply
concerned with the fact that violation of the rule of law in
international affairs can only lead to destruction of mankind through
nuclear holocaust, hereby proclaims that law must replace force as the
controlling factor in the fate of humanity . " one measure of the
difficulty of that task : although invitations went to all communist
countries, none (with the exception of yugoslavia) sent delegations to
athens .
