great britain and then there were three harold macmillan
valiantly tried to divert britain's mind from sex and security .
displaying something like his old form in the house of commons, he
delivered an eloquent speech on prospects for disarmament and a summit
conference that was received respectfully even by the opposition . but
macmillan's eloquence could not diminish tory distress over the three
separate scandals that plagued his government . first, of course, was
the continuation of the profumo case . in marylebone magistrates'
court, osteopath stephen ward, mentor of christine keeler and friend of
disgraced war secretary john profumo, was ordered to stand trial on
seven charges of procuring, arranging abortions, and living off the
earnings of prostitution . by the close of the three-day hearing,
magistrate leo gradwell had permitted numerous witnesses to testify
without revealing their identity, even allowed one witness to leave the
court shrouded in a topcoat . next, there was the case of italian
nuclear physicist giuseppe enrico martelli, who denied at the old
bailey last week that he had prepared to spy for the russians, said
that on the contrary, for seven years he had resisted russian pressure
to become a red agent . but the crown contended that martelli was
caught with shoes that had hollowed-out secret compartments in the
heels and that his cigarette packages contained wafer-thin pads with
secret codes and passwords . finally, there was the case of harold
adrian russell philby, journalist, ex-foreign office official, and boon
companion of communist spies guy burgess and donald maclean, whose
reappearance in the news recalled the most notorious of britain's
sex-and-spy scandals . out of sight . " kim " philby had known burgess
since undergraduate days at cambridge, welcomed him as a boarder in his
house when both were stationed at the british embassy in washington in
1950 . when burgess and maclean eloped to russia in 1951, philby was
forced to resign from the foreign office amidst a flurry of rumors that
he was " the third man " who had tipped them off that the police were
on their trail . later, this charge was indignantly denied by harold
macmillan, then foreign secretary, who personally vouched for philby's
good character . the foreign office even asked the observer to hire
philby as a correspondent because " it seemed unfair that so able a man
should be finding difficulty in earning a living now that he had
clearance from the foreign secretary . " the publication took the hint
and, along with the economist, sent philby to the middle east, where
his father, st . john philby, the famed arab scholar, had spent years
exploring the desert . but last january, beset with financial and
alcohol problems, philby suddenly disappeared from his beirut home and
dropped out of sight . last week, in the commons, lord privy seal
edward heath revealed that philby had surfaced " in one of the
countries of the soviet bloc . " new information had come to light,
said heath, that revealed that philby had been a soviet agent while
working for the government and in fact had been the tipster who had
warned burgess and maclean . to the house, macmillan praised britain's
security services for coming up with the new information overlooking
the fact that they had cottoned to it twelve years too late . case of
jitters . in moscow, guy burgess was amused by the revelations in
parliament . " mark you, my dear boy, " he told a reporter, " the
longer i stay in the soviet union and read about the scandals in
england, the more glad i am to be here, the more i believe that any
civilized person like philby might easily want to come here . " but
burgess denied that philby or anyone else had warned him and maclean
that they were under suspicion . in fact, declared burgess, maclean
only learned that he was being tailed when a london taxi he was riding
in one day was rammed in a traffic accident by a carful of british
secret service agents . summing up " this latest schemozzle " involving
the british government, burgess remarked : " someone once said, "
there is nothing so squalid as a patrician in a panic.' the head of
british security is usually a patrician, and panic seems to be
universal . " back home, the tories might not be panicked, but they
were showing a bad case of the jitters . in two by-elections,
conservative candidates finished dismally behind labor .
