in 1845, before the potato famine decimated its
population, ireland was western europe's most densely settled country
; since then, its 9,000,000 inhabitants have dwindled to 2,824,000 .
ireland is the only nation in europe whose population has shrunk in
that time . while irishmen left the country in waves, they entered it
in a trickle, for ireland has the lowest marriage rate, and one of the
lowest birth rates, in all europe . to the neo-malthusian, the irish
would seem models of ecological balance . in a country where food
production is barely increasing, 66 per cent of all irish males between
20 and 39 are bachelors, and vast numbers of men and women die single .
/ holy ireland . " the exodus from ireland, which novelist george moore
ironically justified by calling ireland " a fatal disease " from which
/ it is the plain duty of every irishman to dissociate himself, "
continued after the country won its independence from britain in 1921 .
as in most other newly liberated countries, the men who took over were
romantic revolutionary heroes, steeped in the otherworld but ill
prepared by experience to meet the practical challenges of building a
modern nation . " when drake was winning seas for england, " in poet
patrick kavanagh's rueful lines, ailed in puddles of the past . " for
the most part, ireland's postliberation politicians and intellectuals
seemed determined to ignore the seas for the puddles . for years they
kept up the strident outcry over partition and winked at endless,
squalid raids on the ulster border . ireland, after all, was a divided
country for decades before such latecomers to partition as germany,
korea and viet nam . in many refreshing ways, the land has remained
true to its leaders' vision of a pastoral " holy ireland . " the irish
spend only one-fifth as much yearly ($8,000,000) for defense as new
yorkers pay each year for garbage collection . they do not support a
single superhighway, nightclub, parking meter, strip joint or subway .
the suicide rate is europe's lowest . crimes of any kind are few and
getting fewer although the authorities admit that the nation's
commonest transgression, larceny of pedal cycles, bears watching .
porther & shamrock . in economic terms, ireland's insular ideal proved
disastrous . true to the aims of the sinn fein (ourselves alone)
movement, the government in the '30s discouraged foreign investment in
ireland, raised some of the world's highest tariff barriers to exclude
british goods and protect new, highly inefficient domestic industry .
the result of its belt tightening was a rising tide of emigrants that
by 1956 reached 600,000, highest since the 1890s . among those who
stayed on, there was a paralyzing sense of frustration and fatalism .
life was not only hard it was dull . to many irishmen, the perverse,
pervasive mediocrity of their culture was typified by gaelic-worship .
the dying gaelic tongue had become the badge of irish nationalism
during the revolution though few of its leaders could speak it . even
before 1949, when the republic of eire was established, the government
had made gaelic language study compulsory in the schools, even
encouraged students to take other subjects entirely in gaelic .
industrial boom, fed by foreign investment, is
illustrated by volkswagens flowing on a busy dublin assembly line .
mining tools,
including drills with synthetic-diamond tips, are made in
south-african-owned shannon plant .
pianos for dutch firm are strung and fitted by skilled
irish craftsmen in shannon .
dried carrots, rapidly frozen for flavor, get careful
check by county cork colleens . export business is ireland's first
attempt to cut into world's frozen-food market .
new plants and housing make shannon
nation's thriving commercial center . the industrial park at airport
offers foreign businesses tax cuts and freedom from duty .
cargo of stout is loaded
aboard guinness brewery ship bound for liverpool . dublin custom house
dominates river liffey scene, with new bus station in background .
sporting events find irishmen in their element, here
packing stands to cheer fast field at dublin's baldoyle track .
preoccupation with horseracing makes legalized betting $59 million
annual business
fox hunting in irish manner calls for kennel of highly trained
hounds . first-rate pack, owned by lord daresbury, surrounds master at
exercise time on his county limerick estate . ireland's hunting is
well-known for its rugged pace .
football, played rough and tough, is another favorite
irish sport . this tussle is an amateur match in dublin .
golf on portmarnock links on
irish sea gives player constant challenge of stiff sea breeze .
championship green, one of 206 in nation, has been called best in world
by arnold palmer .
american artist morris graves fled west coast success for more
leisurely and contemplative life he found in dublin .
director john huston, another
famed u.s . expatriate, spends time off from films as squire on his
galway estate .
entrepreneur brendan o'regan combines job as head of irish tourist
office with promoting shannon's industrial park .
author frank o'connor brings to readers
a real glimpse of irish life in masterful short stories .
the people, once ireland's
most famous export, now are more inclined to stay at home as country
strives to revitalize . this gallery of irish faces is from a sunday
afternoon football crowd in dublin .
painter patrick scott, well-known dublin abstract
artist, poses before his solar device, tempera work on linen canvas .
architect michael
scott, here before his glass-sheathed tv center, plans everything from
new abbey theater to hospitals .
designer sybil connolly brings love of irish fabrics to
fashion world, specializes in use of lace, linen and tweed .
after the long emotional excitement of the fight
for independence, ireland in the postwar years seemed to be
hibernating, caught in a descending spiral of cynicism and feckless
nostalgia . its malaise was expressed by playwright sean o'casey : "
someone or something is ruining us . what do we send out to the world
now but woeful things young lads and lassies, porther, greyhounds,
sweep tickets, and the shamrock green ? we've scatthered ourselves
over the wide world, and left our own sweet land thin . we're just
standing on our knees now . " bloody baluba . today the irish are
beginning to stand on their feet . in business and government,
universities and pubs, there is a new sense of purpose and push, a
mounting awareness that ireland has finally begun to make its way in
the world . after four decades of broody isolation, and seemingly
pro-german neutrality in world war ii (although in their contrary way,
many irish volunteered for the british army), a newly outward-looking
ireland has acquired international influence out of all proportion to
its size or political power . in the united nations, the nonaligned
irish led by ambassador frederick boland, who was president of the
general assembly in the time of khrushchev's shoe-banging tantrum are
universally respected . in the congo, where 5,000 irish troops have
served and 26 died with the u.n . peacekeeping mission, their probity
and discipline command the admiration of africans and belgians alike .
the experience has added a new term of abuse to the irishman's copious
vocabulary of invective : " you bloody baluba ! "  the u.n . irish
have taught many a native to dance a jig . says a captain from cork :
/ only the irish and other heathens can appreciate our dahling pipes .
/ two-way bridge . as the man who has done most to end his country's
long sleep, sean lemass got his chance when he took over as taoiseach
in 1959 . de valera, near-blind and doggedly indifferent to the
country's worsening economic plight, was persuaded by his own fianna
fail party to step aside for lemass and run for the presidency . his
successor, after 19 years as minister of commerce and industry, was
passionately convinced that ireland's timorous protectionism could only
lead to national extinction . as fianna fail's new leader, lemass was
the antithesis of all the old fire-breathing heroes, talked trade and
tariffs to the voters in intense, rapid-fire sentences that many found
hard to follow . " that lemass ! " snorted one dubious dublin
politician . " he couldn't lead ireland over o'connell bridge . " what
sean lemass wanted most was to lure foreign investors over o'connell
bridge . the new prime minister sent blarney-blessed salesmen around
the world persuading foreign industries to set up plants in ireland .
they offered one of the few labor surpluses in all europe, liberal
grants for equipment and construction, and additional cash to companies
that would build plants and train workers in ireland's pinched
northwest and south .
a tribe in north katanga that ambushed an irish contingent
in !960, killing ten of its soldiers .
many irishmen were profanely skeptical, but the
program so far has proved a gallivanting success . ireland today is in
the throes of a belated industrial revolution that is boosting living
standards, diversifying its farm-based economy, and will increasingly
absorb the talents that the nation breeds . since 1955, 160 new irish
and foreign-backed plants have created 21,000 new jobs and are turning
out goods ranging from transistor radios (japanese) and pianos (dutch)
to heavy cranes for a german company and oil heaters for a french firm
. fifty more plants are nearing completion, most notably a french-owned
aviation factory to turn out a new, short-haul plane aimed specifically
at u.s . feeder airlines . the shiny new plants in shannon, cork,
limerick, dublin and killarney ( " just like the black forest, " says a
west german industrialist who has built a factory there) have worked no
economic miracle in ireland to compare with europe's boom . but
industrial production has risen 20 per cent in three years . and its
success is stanching the population outflow : from an average of
43,000 a year, the number of emigrants dropped by more than 50 per cent
last year, is expected to total only 14,000 in 1963 . many emigrants
are now returning to take jobs back home . four rs . today's expansion
would not have been possible if sean lemass had not started laying the
groundwork long ago . lemass is the great-grandson of a hatter who
landed in dublin in 1820 . a young-appearing 63, he is by age, if not
by political style, a member of the generation that freed ireland and
has ruled it ever since . at school, he learned his four rs in the
dublin of 50 years ago, revolution was part of the curriculum and by
the age of 14 had joined the republican na fianna eireann, a sort of
boy scout underground . two years later, when the irish republican army
occupied the dublin post office at the start of the botched 1916 easter
week rising, sean was the youngest rebel of them all, spent four days
on the roof with a rifle, waiting for the british to mount an
old-fashioned infantry charge . he says wryly : " i'm afraid we had
rather naive ideas about modern warfare . " when british shells ended
the fiasco, 15 irish leaders were shot . young lemass was taken
prisoner and released within a month, presumably because of his age .
according to cherished, if apocryphal dublin legend, " the cops gave
a kick in the arse and told him to go home to his mom . " poor risk .
but in the turbulent years when the irish rebels fought against
britain's black and tans, sean lemass grew into a rugged guerrilla
fighter in the i.r.a.'s dublin brigade . he was jailed by the english
four times, escaped once . after the 1921 treaty, by which britain
created the self-governing irish free state but retained jurisdiction
over the six protestant counties of ulster, civil war flared between "
pro-treaty " irishmen and de valera's followers, who cried that ireland
could not accept partition . lemass, an officer on de valera's staff,
was captured by the other side and imprisoned for a year . in jail he
continued his war-shattered education with a cram course in economics,
politics and irish revolutionary writings . though he never returned to
prison after his release in 1923, four-time loser lemass was plainly a
poor matrimonial risk . when he started courting pretty, vivacious
kathleen hughes, he had the added disadvantages of having to placate
her father, a dublin carpenter and an anglophile . he warned his
daughter : " that boy is always on the run ; he'll never be able to
make a home for you . " kathleen decided to risk it anyway . they were
married in 1924, have a son noel, who is a member of parliament, and
three daughters (the eldest, maureen, is married to charles haughey,
the shrewd, hard-knuckled minister of justice, who is tipped as a
potential prime minister) .
lemass' bold program of industrialization has
already created new jobs and wealth in an economy whose primary
product, beef for britain, has been the same for as long as there have
been potatoes to go with it . as new opportunity at home lowers the
perilously high emigration rate, the government is finally beginning to
rebut the bitter quip that ireland is " a home for men rather than a
breeding ground for emigrants and bullocks . " the country's rapturous
huzzas for john kennedy were more than an expression of pride in a gael
made good to many young irishmen, he seems more real than the irish
martyrs whose streaked statues fill dublin's parks with silent
declamation . jack's homecoming epitomized to the irish the successful
distance they themselves have traveled . spanglish & spells . however
far they may go, the irish retain a deep sense of their past and the
myths and memories that crowd their wild, lonely land . " the gods
whistle in the air, " wrote sean o'faolain . " the otherworld is always
at one's shoulder . " the otherworld and the real past are inseparably
bound together in the irish imagination and in the runic place names,
from the pagan landmark called two breasts of dana to ancient
waterford, where in 1170 strongbow, the norman earl of pembroke,
clamped 7f centuries of english rule on ireland . what the mists of
legend cannot obscure is that for ages of religious persecution and
economic exploitation, through countless risings and reprisals, the
irish slaved, starved and battled for their land as stubbornly as if
ireland itself were the isle of the blest . the remote little island in
the atlantic has cast its shadow across the civilized world since the
dark ages, when irish priests and scholars roamed europe expounding new
(and mostly heretical) theologies . in a diaspora even greater than the
expulsion of the jews, more than 3,000,000 irishmen in the past 100
years have scattered across the world, forming what an irish writer
calls " one of the world's great secret societies, with branches
everywhere " though the society was never very secret . everyone has
his own list of great irishmen, but there is no denying that the gifts
of the irish have always enriched other countries more than their own .
their talent for politics, for faith, above all for words, gave more
brilliant politicians, distinguished churchmen and magical writers to
the u.s . and the rest of the world than to ireland . perhaps only
their talent for fighting, while amply exported, as amply remained at
home . though in foreign lands, they invincibly stayed themselves ;
they also showed an uncanny ability to adapt to other cultures, whether
in latin america, where they concocted a lilting lingua franca known as
spanglish, or down under, where they developed a spectacular sport
known as australian rules, a blend of gaelic football and rugby .
though there was hardly a country or a field of endeavor where irishmen
failed to make a mark or a mint, the diminishing number of their
compatriots at home kept wondering fretfully if they were a vanishing
race .
heat with peat . when sinn fein broke apart, young lemass
was the chief architect of de valera's new fianna fail (heroes of
destiny) party, which came to power in 1932 and has been in office
almost continually ever since . at 32, lemass was the youngest member
of de valera's cabinet and earned the affectionate biblical sobriquet "
benjamin " (after jacob's youngest son) . though dev had taught
mathematics and is fervently believed by many fond compatriots to be
one of the 13 men on earth who comprehend the theory of relativity the
taoiseach had neither head nor heart for economics, and left benjamin
to run his ministry as he saw fit . lemass faced monumental problems,
for during the '30s the government was locked in a vindictive, futile
economic war with the english, though it remained economically
dependent on britain . he strove desperately to mobilize enough new
industry to supply the nation's basic needs, though at high cost ; he
also founded the state transport network and organized a national
merchant marine in time to keep ireland fed during world war ii, in
which he took on the additional job of minister of supply, and by
brilliant improvisation averted crippling shortages . until recently,
it was axiomatic that " nobody but a fool would invest " in ireland .
lemass did not hesitate to use public funds wherever private capital
was not forthcoming for key projects . he took over a one-horse power
company and built it into a nationwide network that has electrified 76
per cent of all irish farms . the country had no oil and little coal,
but lemass found an inexhaustible source of industrial fuel in its peat
bogs, where huge machines now cut turf that a busy, state-owned
processing plant turns into inexpensive, slowburning briquettes . after
a long political wrangle, he got ireland's state-owned airline off the
ground, and has watched happily as aer lingus' shamrock-painted planes
have made it one of the few government airlines to turn a consistent
profit on the atlantic run . the very word socialism terrifies fianna
fail supporters, who are not only overwhelmingly catholic but include
many small landowners . yet one-third of all industrial enterprises in
ireland today are bankrolled by the government, which has gone farther
toward nationalization than even britain's socialists advocate . lemass
says he shares the attitude toward socialism that was expressed in the
late pope john's encyclical, pacem in terris : that no political
system is undesirable if it benefits the people . trim sails . in 1957,
after their children had grown up, sean and kathleen lemass moved from
their big old house in dublin to an unpretentious sevenroom bungalow in
a pleasant suburb south of the capital, where the prime minister is
picked up by a government car at 9 : 45 a.m . each day . he seldom
returns until after dinner . some years ago, lemass cut down on golf
and cards to the relief of old poker cronies who usually wound up
losers when lemass played to devote more time to the job . sturdy (5 ft
. 10 in.) and carefully groomed, he holds among his few foibles an
aversion to the byronic manes affected by many irishmen, and he does
not hesitate to bark at friends, underlings or his son when they need
haircuts .
some politicians criticize lemass for
being too much of a pragmatist . " he's a bit of a fly-boy, " said
labor party leader james larkin . " he trims his sails to different
winds . " the greatest challenge that lemass has to face as a
politician is to revitalize drab, unimaginative fianna fail, many of
whose front-bench heroes of destiny have been around since dev first
came to office . seven of the 13 members of the lemass cabinet are 60
or under, which is a relatively green age in irish politics but hardly
green enough . though he has little of the personal magnetism of old
spellbinder dev, the quiet man's drive to get ireland into the world's
markets and forums has attracted some of the bright, restive young
irishmen who are showing a revival of interest in politics . total
effort . lemass' most bruising disappointment in office was charles de
gaulle's rejection of british membership in the common market last year
. determined to take ireland into europe alongside britain, lemass had
already started whittling tariff barriers to give ireland's older and
most cosseted industries a whiff of the cold competitive wind outside .
to clear the way for ireland's entry, which he now believes cannot come
before 1970, lemass has unequivocally committed his nation, which has
9,000 men under arms, to support of nato policies . in 1949, at nato's
founding,the government declined membership with the legalistic
argument that to join an alliance with britain would be tantamount to
recognition of ulster, whose existence the republic has never accepted
. to lemass, by contrast, one of the most compelling motives for seeing
britain and ireland inside the european community is the very prospect
that ireland would thereby take a step closer to reunification .
automatic dismantling of their mutual tariff barriers under common
market rules, says lemass, would finally necessitate a degree of
cooperation between protestant and catholic ireland . instead of the
present prolonged farce of nonrecognition neither country will even
permit extradition of criminals by the other and continued stagnation
of ulster's economy, lemass foresees " a total national effort in which
old differences and animosities can be forgotten . " all the details .
the government's eagerness to raise ireland's " green curtain, " as
lemass calls it, reflects a growing cosmopolitanism in the universities
and population centers . the irish have made executives and technicians
from more than a dozen countries resoundingly welcome . they cheered
mightily for schoolgirl harumi suzuki, eight-year-old daughter of a
japanese plant manager at shannon, when she carried off first and third
prizes for irish poetry and gaelic recitation . young ireland's
horizons are being broadened by the foreign students who have been
flocking to irish universities, where they comprise nearly 17 per cent
of total enrollment ; most come from afro-asian countries, where the
distinctive accent of ex-colonial, nonaligned dublin has become
something of a status symbol . the visiting students, in turn, have
generated new interest in language and history courses among their
irish friends . the ultraconservative roman catholic clergy still
heavily censors the arts and entertainment . at one time or another,
many of the best native authors have been banned from libraries,
including works by george moore, liam o'flaherty, o'casey, frank
o'connor, shaw, brendan behan . but things are easing up a little .
cinematic sex has become so much sexier and more frequent, explains
justice minister haughey, that the censors have been told to go easy
with the scissors, " or else our cinemas won't get any films at all . "
another sign of the new liberality is a scheduled visit by the bolshoi
ballet to dublin this month, for irish mistrust of the intriguous
russians is so keen that they have yet to recognize the 45-year-old
soviet government .
television, which now lights up more than 200,000
screens, is a perennial assault on gaelic puritanism . ireland's own
station competes with programs beamed from britain that seem incredibly
risque to irish viewers ; the bbc's uninhibited coverage of christine
keeler's exploits has even jogged the stodgy, self-censoring irish
press into giving readers all the details . many irishmen, increasingly
resentful of censorship, have taken to sampling censored books, films
or plays by taking the 90-minute flight to london where far more
horrendous temptations abound . rebels & monarchs . the irish have
written some of the tenderest love lyrics in english literature, but in
their actual contact with the opposite sex, irishmen sometimes resemble
colombia's kogi indians, who, despising women, spend all their time
discussing philosophy with other males and chewing cocoa leaves to cool
off the sexual urges . an acid axiom among irish girls runs : " put an
irish feller in a room with a girl and two bottles of stout, and he'll
pick the stout any time . " many explanations have been offered for his
seeming misogyny : the epic suspicion that war and the gods are more
important than mere love ; the relentless emotional dominance of irish
mothers over irish sons ; the oddly puritanical streak in irish
catholicism ; above all, the heritage of hardship that gives the irish
a mortal terror of insecurity and encourages them to stay celibate . at
least some of these factors are changing, and the relations between the
sexes seem less self-conscious and at times downright friendly . the
irish now wed younger ; the average marriage age dropped from nearly
35 for men in 1929 to just over 30, from 29 for women to just under 27
. for the young, one of the most joyous innovations in recent years has
been a proliferation of dance halls, which have reached scores of small
communities, and a burgeoning of bands " 200 in all that keep the ould
sod jumping with hippetyhoppety jazz and carry such intriguing names as
rebels, jets, monarchs . unlike the old days, when the local priest
would often disperse a country ceilidh at sundown, dance-hall hours are
regulated by magistrates, who tend to be more liberal . and, as always,
the western world has its playboys . in london, where one in eight
births is illegitimate, authorities report that a disproportionate
number of unwed pegeens come over to have their babies free on
britain's national health service .
the most conspicuous vice of the irish in times
past has been " the drink . " today, though the pubs keep longer hours
and most irishmen can afford to drink more, public drunkenness is no
longer the common spectacle it used to be, and barefoot boys no longer
trot through city streets bearing jugs of foaming sout or bottles of
brandy home to dad . the younger generation seems to be more sober than
its parents . also, alcoholic habits are changing : more drinking is
done at home nowadays ; cocktails and hard liquor are cutting into
beer consumption ; and many pubs, which had long been jealously
guarded male preserves, have opened " singing lounges " where an
irishman can take his wife or girl . the image of the boozy,
belligerent irishman condemned as sheer hostile propaganda by sean
lemass dies hard, nonetheless . indeed, drunk or sober, few people on
earth can raise a glass with greater gusto or style . radiant goals .
ireland faces many more urgent problems . the country is still
critically short of modern housing ; hundreds of once elegant georgian
mansions in dublin have for years held some of europe's most squalid
slums . while the government has succeeded in easing ireland's
historically harsh system of farm leasing, nearly 1,000,000 of the
country's 11 million acres of agricultural land are still covered by
eleven-month leases, which discourage tenants and owners alike from
improving the land (after twelve months on a farm, an irish tenant has
a legal claim to buy it) . though 45 acres of good land are the
accepted minimum for a viable farm, there are still 208,000 farms (of
360,000) with less than 30 acres each . in the poor western counties,
one in three farms is still less than 15 acres, and sons grow old
waiting for fathers to die . though sean lemass is often chided in
parliament for foot-dragging on housing and farm reform, most of the
nation's problems are a longtime legacy of national poverty and
political timidity . what is radiantly different about ireland today is
the serious expectation that its ills and lags will in fact be
corrected . lemass will soon release details of a new six-year economic
program that aims to boost the g.n.p . 50 per cent by 1970 . if it
succeeds and his goals in the past have been set far short of actual
performance the nation will have traveled a long way from " the
unfortunate country " of ireland's ancient lament . the varied and
lively virtues of the irish, which in the past have often shaded into
weaknesses when they were not vigorously applied to a cause, are the
nation's best assurance that it can find the future it seeks for itself
. however bright the goal, ireland will still be many lightyears away
from the blest isle . but who knows ? they may have their troubles
there too .
