cold war to moscow, with caution the pattern of arrival and
departure might be symbolic . by week's end everyone in moscow believed
that the red chinese delegation was ready to head home before too long
. at the same time, u.s . and british delegations were due to arrive .
the russians were jamming radio peking but let the voice of america
come in loud and clear . faced with the open chinese challenge to
soviet leadership of world communism, nikita khrushchev may want to
ease tensions with the west, both to bulwark his position at home and
to demonstrate the genuineness of his much-heralded coexistence policy
abroad . but whether khrushchev wants it badly enough to make some
really meaningful concessions is still another question . the issues .
as he flew off to moscow for another round of test-ban talks,
presidential envoy averell harriman noted hopefully that russia was
being more pleasant in " the small things of life . " as for the big
things, " we are going in good faith and in the hope of achieving some
steps that will be beneficial . " the principal issues facing harriman
and his fellow negotiator, british minister of science viscount
hailsham, in moscow . . .test ban : khrushchev has indicated that he
would revive russia's 1961 terms for a test ban, which included a
voluntary moratorium on underground detonations, without effective
controls . this proposal was rejected by the u.s . at . the time .
then, last year, russia offered
to permit three inspections of its territory yearly by way of policing
an underground ban . moscow subsequently reneged, khrushchev now
insists that russia will never " open its door to nato spies, " and
that " this is no subject for bargaining . " the west will not accept
an unenforceable moratorium on underground tests, since it believes
that the russians would break it at will, as they violated the
voluntary test ban in 1961 . however, if russia agrees to a treaty that
simply forbids tests in the atmosphere which are easily detectable the
west is willing to take up the problem of underground testing at a
later date . .nonaggression pact . khrushchev declared that " at the
conclusion of a testban agreement, " he will revive russia's hoary
demand for a nonaggression pact between the 15 nato powers and the
satellite nations of the warsaw treaty . in the past, this proposal has
invariably been rejected by the west because west germany and france
object that it would imply western acceptance of a divided europe and
recognition of east germany . in any case, they point out, no such
declaration is needed, for nato's defensive purposes were guaranteed in
its charter 14 years ago . the prospects . u.s . policymakers emphasize
that a test-ban treaty would have little if any effect on the balance
of power . since both east and west have more than enough nuclear
warheads for any conceivable conflict, the only way either side could
gain a decisive strategic lead would be through a major breakthrough in
missile delivery systems, which would not be covered by the test ban .
in any case, nuclear technology is now so advanced that weapons such as
the anti-missile missile can be developed entirely in the laboratory .
furthermore, no western statesman believes that a test-ban agreement
will restrain the french or chinese from testing nuclear weapons at
will, or even slow the spread of nuclear arms to other nations . why,
then, is the west so eager to sign a nuclear pact with russia ?
rightly or wrongly, washington has come to view a test-ban treaty as
the touchstone of soviet intentions . if this one outstanding issue can
be resolved after five years of frustration, the state department
believes, then there is hope that east and west may ultimately be able
to settle other issues . though harriman is empowered only to negotiate
a test-ban agreement, he expects to " explore " other cold war
problems, such as berlin and russia's failure to enforce the laotian
neutrality pact . on those matters khrushchev so far did not appear to
budge . talking to belgium's foreign minister paul-henri spaak in kiev
last week, khrushchev said : " berlin is the foot that kennedy has in
europe . every time i want to, i'll stamp on it . " in short, the
east-west talks in moscow may just possibly prove no more fruitful than
the sino-soviet talks . but u.s . observers still wonder how long
khrushchev can go on fighting a twofront war, refusing both concessions
to peking and a genuine move toward " peaceful coexistence " with the
west .
