communists wait till next year scarcely had the sino-soviet talks
gotten underway than the meeting headed for collapse . it did not much
matter when red china's seven-man delegation would pack their bags and
actually leave moscow ; back home peking's people's daily seemed ready
to call it quits . " we want unity, not a split, " said the voice of
red china . " but we have to point out with heavy hearts that events
have gone contrary to our hopes . the situation is very grave . "
absolute secrecy . all week there had been a strange sensation in
moscow that maybe there was no sino-soviet meeting at all . the kremlin
acted as though the showdown never took place . dom priemov, the
reception house where the sessions were supposed to be held, was
carefully avoided by soviet reporters and photographers . asked why, a
moscow news executive said sarcastically : " it's payday . they've all
gone for their money . " after meeting twice to discuss formalities,
the russians and red chinese met only three times during the next seven
days . just before one session began, a western reporter asked a soviet
plainclothesman what time the peking delegation was expected . the cop
shrugged and said : " you never know with them . they are a very
disorganized people . we waited for them yesterday, and they never did
show up . " the red chinese delegation apparently spent most of its
time driving through the lenin hills section of the city in black
limousines, shuttling mysteriously from peking's embassy to dom priemov
to the villa where they lived . western newsmen once glimpsed teng
hsiao-ping, the leader of peking's group, serenely strolling through
the villa's gardens . the only sign of life behind the massive,
cream-colored walls of dom priemov were the boots of a soviet soldier,
which protruded beneath the spiked iron gates when he opened a peephole
to scrutinize an arriving automobile . for the first time, russians
were willing to talk and even to joke about the sino-soviet conflict .
one crack making the rounds in moscow suggested that the way to solve
the whole thing was for mao tse-tung and charles de gaulle to conclude
an alliance, thus letting the two troublemakers take care of each other
. absolute equality . trhoughout the on-and-off meetings, the
ideological fire continued above the heads of the delegates . the
kremlin splashed a policy statement on the front page of pravda that
ominously warned peking of the " dangerous consequences " of its policy
. as for nikita khrushchev, he called out the brass bands, honor guard
and television cameras to welcome hungary's janos kadar, who repaid the
flattery by once again backing moscow's line of peaceful coexistence .
red china, whose delegation's arrival in moscow was downplayed by the
soviet government and deliberately ignored by the soviet press, fired
its own volley of insults . for the first time, peking claimed absolute
equality with the communist party of the soviet union and warned the
kremlin in an elaborate simile : " no genuine unity can be achieved by
an attitude that allows the magistrate to burn down houses, while
forbidding the common people even to light their lamps . " all these
sino-soviet exchanges were carefully framed to put the blame for the
split on the other fellow . obviously the chinese never expected the
moscow meeting to succeed, insisted on it merely to embarrass the
soviets . the kremlin, in turn, could not afford to appear intractable
. at week's end the peking press suggested that perhaps a few of the
sino-soviet differences could be settled soon, while others could be
deferred till later . this simply meant that the chinese were ready to
prolong the quarrel indefinitely . " if the differences cannot be
resolved this year, " said peking blandly, " they can wait until next
year . " the russians are less patient . they shot back an answering
communique warning peking that " the immediate future " will decide
whether the split will widen . then moscow gave the red chinese and the
west a pointed reminder . after all, said the soviets, " we have a
common enemy . /
