espionage midsummer dragnet throughout the world last week,
secret agents were on the move many of them in the direction of jail .
the u.s . had just rounded up its fourth of july catch ; west germany
was trying three spies who had penetrated its supposedly impenetrable
gehlen intelligence organization (see following story) ; and britain
had two spy thrillers running concurrently . defeated machinery . on
trial in london, italian-born atomic physicist giuseppe martelli tried
to explain away his possession of hollow-heeled shoes suitable for
concealing microfilm, cigarette packs containing thin, inflammable
message pads, sheets of rendezvous instructions, a high-powered camera,
and a super-strength radio receiver . he had accepted all these gadgets
from the russians, he said, only to string them along and then denounce
them at the right time to the british authorities . asked the judge :
/ you felt that you could defeat the whole machinery of soviet
intelligence ? " and, also in london, one of the oddest of the spy
cases came to light when the government admitted that it was granting
asylum to anatoly dolnytsin, a former senior russian intelligence
officer who defected to the west 18 months ago, and had spent the
intervening time being thoroughly pumped by u.s . and british agents .
one reported result : the revelation that british newsman h.a.r .
philby was indeed the " third man " who enabled spies burgess and
maclean to escape arrest and flee to russia in 1951 . last winter
philby, too, slipped behind the iron curtain just ahead of pursuing
mi-5 agents . although the government had made quite a show of asking
the british press not to print the story, the authorities had in fact
leaked it . laborites charged that this possibly endangered dolnytsin,
who is somewhere in a british hideout, and that dolnytsin was being
unveiled now by macmillan's government in the hope of claiming a spy
success after so many security disasters . fingered spies . so many red
spies are caught, probably because there are so many more of them
around. the u.s . state department estimates that the communist
nations employ more than 300,000 trained agents, who are helped in
their prying by the " legal " spies attached to the 46 soviet embassies
and legations in the free world . (the u.s . operates with a crack
corps of agents only about one-fifth as large.) but why were so many
red spies coming to light at once ? whenever one great power has a
big espionage roundup, as russia did last may in the trial of russian
scientist oleg penkovsky, who turned out to be a longtime western
agent, spies elsewhere brace themselves for a period of rough weather .
furthermore, there is a seasonal factor involved ; summer is the
traditional time to put the finger on spies . around the end of june,
many communist " diplomats " prepare to go home for vacations and new
instructions . having had an eye on them already, the fbi then often
decides to pounce and expose them before they can be reassigned .
native passion . one fact to emerge from the recent wave of arrests is
that the soviet apparatus seems sentimentally fond of such old
cloak-and-dagger standbys as false bottoms in valises, hidden
compartments in talcum-powder cans and toothpaste tubes, and
flashlights with message chambers instead of batteries . a russian
spy's residence usually has as many trap doors, hollow beams, false
walls, secret passages and double- and triple-locked doors as a grade b
horror movie . actually, agents both east and west have benefited
enormously from far more modern devices . it is now possible to
eavesdrop on a conversation held in the middle of an empty prairie by
simply pointing a beam of light from 500 yards away . new cameras can
take pictures in total darkness without the use of infra-red light .
finely ground lenses can zoom in from blocks away to pick up the fine
print on an insurance policy . but the soviets like the more
old-fashioned and romantic gadgets, mostly, it seems, from a native
passion for melodrama .
recently nabbed red agents include sweden's ex-military
attache stig wennerstrom ; russia's ivan egerov and wife, attached to
the u.n . secretariat ; two unidentified russians caught in washington
using the names and papers of innocent living americans, as well as a
british corporal, a french naval reservist, a uman and half a dozen
russian,  rumanian and czech diplomats .
