triple double with some 125 east-bloc agents arrested every
month in their divided country, germans are blase about spy stories .
but the case that unfolded in a karlsruhe courtroom last week proved
that bonn's vaunted gehlen intelligence service had been infiltrated
for ten years by the reds, and that the organization had knowingly
hired former nazis . all three of the men on trial, longtime employees
of gehlen, were also longtime employees of the soviet union . by all
odds, it was the most embarrassing spy scandal to hit west germany
since the war . " i hate americans . " ex-wehrmacht general reinhard
gehlen, who is as secretive as any of his 5,000 men (his last known
photograph dates from 1944), set up his outfit in 1947 with the
cooperation of the cia . it was staffed largely with veteran agents who
got their training under the nazis, although gehlen himself had never
joined the nazi party . in 1955 the gehlen apparatus was turned over
from cia control to the west german government ; it reports directly
to the chancellor's office, has a top secret budget . yet in court, the
three men who penetrated its walled-in munich headquarters made the
feat sound about as difficult as joining a bavarian marching and
gymnastic society . first of the trio to face the five redrobed judges
at karlsruhe was stocky hans clemens, 61, who peered with interest at
an exhibit table covered with the tools of his trade : cameras, tape
recorders, microscopes, radios, films and suitcases with secret
compartments . as he told it, clemens had been a pianist as a youth in
dresden, but changed keys and became a nazi police official in 1933 .
he headed the dresden office of the dreaded ss security service .
during world war ii he commanded an execution squad in italy that
killed 330 hostages and for his savagery won the title " the tiger of
como . " back in germany after the war, he met a colonel " max " of
soviet intelligence, who suggested that he get a job with the gehlen
organization . it proved easy . the motive he gave for becoming a
double agent for the reds seemed like an old propaganda broadcast . " i
hate americans like the plague, " he said in court, recalling that
after american air raids on dresden he had sworn, " i shall repay them
doubly and triply . " champagne in streams . one major service clemens
performed for the russians was to recruit a former ss colleague, heinz
felfe . cool and articulate, defendant felfe, 45, told the judges that
he too was an ardent nazi, had worked his way up into heinrich
himmler's state security bureau . he bragged of his wartime successes,
which he claimed included getting first reports on teheran and yalta
from a confidant of allen dulles . after war's end he was classified by
a german denazification board as unbelastet (not incriminated) . this
astonishing fact was acknowledged by presiding judge kurt weber with an
outraged " donnerwetter ! " (thunderation) . in 1947, just 18 months
after felfe's release from a prisoner-of-war camp, he found spy work
with the british, continuing with them until, as he put it, the british
/ ran out of money . " then his old friend clemens made contact with
him on orders from colonel " max, " arranged a meeting in east berlin,
at which felfe was hired to work for the soviets . the deal was
clinched at a dinner at max's villa, where the table " was piled high
with food and champagne poured in streams . " not long afterward,
thanks to a recommendation from his friend clemens, felfe was offered a
job in the gehlen service . " now, " he said, " i was to dance at two
weddings, with the russians and with gehlen . " felfe danced up fast in
gehlen's ranks, and by the time of his arrest in 1961 had become a
department head in the counter-espionage division, specializing in
anti-soviet work . rewarding investment . the worriedlooking third
member of the group, one erwin tiebel, merely served as courier for
felfe and clemens . the spies transmitted their information by
microfilm hidden in food cans sent to east germany, by drops along the
autobahn, and by frequent trips on u.s . air force courier flights to
berlin, which they boarded under the pretext of being on gehlen
business, the three got a total of $78,000 from moscow . for the
investment,
the soviets got 15,000 microfilm photographs of west german
intelligence documents, 20 spools of tape recordings, numerous verbal
and radio reports, including the identity of many west german agents
working behind the iron curtain . as the testimony poured forth, the
outcry from west germany's press and public forced defense minister
kaiuwe von hassel to promise a " re-examination " of gehlen's
organization, and reportedly gehlen will retire soon . von hassel added
lamely : " there will always be cases of infiltration in any
intelligence service . " but the gehlen group must have set a record of
sorts . at one point, testified felfe, his russian bosses urged him to
get a transfer because there already was a surplus of soviet agents in
his department . shortly before their arrest, added felfe, he and
clemens received letters of commendation and cash bonuses from the
chairman of the soviet committee for state security.simultaneously, the
two agents got citations for ten years' meritorious service from
general gehlen .
