berlin one last run hans weidner had been hoping for months to
escape drab east germany and make his way to the west . the odds were
against him, for weidner, 40, was a cripple on crutches who lived in
the village of neugersdorf, 115 miles southeast of the frontier of
freedom but hans weidner did have one major asset, the bus that
he operated for the local communist regime . it was an ugly thing, and
ancient . its chassis creaked, and the engine coughed ; a
cream-colored coat of paint could not disguise the welts and bruises of
two decades of chugging service . in fact, the bus was ready for the
junk pile when weidner decided to press it into service for one last
run . sharp blades . the hazards would be great on the journey to the
border ; so weidner signed up a fellow villager, jurgen wagner, 22, to
take the wheel . eight days before christmas, the pair began the
feverish preparations in weidner's garage . first weidner and wagner
attached a heavy snowplow to the front of the bus, not to plow snow,
but to scoop away the heavy obstacles they knew awaited them at
roadblocks ahead . to all six lugs on each front wheel they bolted
sharp blades of the toughest steel, affixed so that the whirling edges
would chop barbed wire to bits . then they wedged one-quarter-inch
sections of steel plate inside the bus to stop bullets . at last all
was ready . on christmas eve, weidner and wagner piled their wives and
four children aboard, not forgetting three tons of household belongings
. for added protection the plotters shoveled a ton of coal and potatoes
into the back of the bus . then they chugged off north toward berlin
along back roads to escape communist patrols . just before they reached
the wall, they planned to swing west in order to enter the east-west
autobahn leading to the u.s . sector of the city . en route, the
radiator froze in the subzero weather . that fixed, they were only a
few miles farther when a tire blew out . the kids were crying and the
wives shivering with cold and panic when, at last, they arrived at
drewitz, the most heavily guarded checkpoint on the entire autobahn to
berlin . it was no time to stop and reconsider . flying potatoes . "
wah-ah, wah-ah, " shrieked the police-type klaxons that weidner had
thoughtfully installed in advance . the communist guards obediently
raised the first of three barriers . but what was a bus doing on
emergency duty ? suddenly the shooting began too late . wagner, at 40
m.p.h., was already crashing through the second barrier 100 yards
ahead, then the third, only 20 yards away . its windshield smashed, its
passengers shaken, its cargo of coal and potatoes in every corner of
the cab, the old bus finally lurched to a stop a few miles down the
road where the communists no longer mattered at the u.s . checkpoint, a
foot or two inside west berlin .
