south viet nam rice & rats one day last july sergeant first
class roque matagulay, 31, a guam-born u.s . military adviser with a
vietnamese detachment, ventured out of his compound near the coastal
town of phanthiet, 90 miles east of saigon, on an off-duty hunting trip.
instead of game, sergeant matagulay ran into a band of communist viet
cong guerrillas, was held captive until his release last month . last
week, in his first press conference since he was freed, matagulay
depicted the spartan life and grim dedication of the viet cong .
matagulay said that the viet cong moved freely over the countryside and
that in the villages peasants freely offered rebels food and shelter .
the typical menu for both prisoner and captors was rice, salt and fish
oil . rats were an occasional delicacy that brightened the diet served
both as rat soup and barbecued rodent . though game was plentiful, the
reds never hunted . " they were afraid to use up ammunition hunting
deer, " said matagulay . for the first several months of his captivity,
matagulay was tied up and constantly reminded that he would be killed
on the spot if he made the slightest effort to escape . he underwent no
physical torture, instead was daily subjected to eight solid hours of
political indoctrination and interrogation . matagulay was forced to
listen to the english-language broadcasts on communist north viet nam's
radio hanoi three times a day and was regularly tested on what they had
to say about the world situation . obviously because madagulay is a
darkskinned guamanian, his interrogators harped on the plight of the
negroes in the u.s . south . again and again, he refused to sign
anti-american propaganda documents, but finally, wracked with malaria
and with his weight down from 185 to 145, he signed four statements, "
when i believed i was at the end of my physical endurance . " the
documents, which matagulay later had to read aloud so that the viet
cong could record them on tape, bitterly attacked south viet nam's
president ngo dinh diem and the u.s.'s support for his government .
last month, to cheer matagulay up, the communists said that they were
fixing him a special christmas dinner . he never got it . on christmas
eve the reds held a release ceremony, invited 400 soldiers, peasants,
women and children to witness a last act of generosity to their
prisoner . matagulay then was put on a bus and sent back to freedom .
