west germany the adipose society since the days when hitler opted
for guns rather than butter, west germany has known near-starvation,
austerity and, for the past decade, such heady abundance that today it
has become the adipose society . following the early '50s, when the
postwar boom set off what germans call the edelfresswelle, the gorgeous
gobbling wave, buttocks and bosoms have expanded even more rapidly than
the economy, and doctors have recognized two universal ailments :
doppelkinnepidemie, double-chin epidemic, and hangebauch, or bellyhang
. the majority of germans, from newborn babes to cabinet ministers, are
fatter today than at any other time in this century . a top dietetic
authority estimates that 20 per cent of all west germans are overweight
. in a new book titled grow thin, but how ? , dr . andreas duttler
warns : " corpulence is the dark side of the economic miracle . "
rearguard action . the explosion of vital statistics is amply evident
from the island of sylt, where pneumatic nudists jounce across the
beaches, to the spanish coastline, where bulgy brunnhildes have already
made the authorities regret their decision not to enforce a longtime
ban on bikinis . west germany's men's wear industry in recent years has
had to add a new clothing classification, tactfully dubbed boss or
manager size ; nearly a quarter of all new clothes are now bought by
customers of managerial girth, while sales of " normal " sizes are
diminishing . french garment manufacturers who export to germany sell a
higher proportion of jumbo sizes (16 to 18) there than anywhere else .
in most other countries, also, well-buttressed women steer clear of
such revealing clothes as stretch ski pants ; in west germany,
according to the world-girdling bogner stretchpants concern, there is a
steady demand for slipcover sizes . many german women are fighting a
determined rearguard action, nonetheless . sales of foundation garments
have quadrupled since 1950, and slimming parlors have become almost as
thick as germany's beloved whipped cream . in bonn, where a session at
the stylish salon der figur ranges from $6 for a plump pubescent to
$125 for a wellmarbled dowager, owner helga pietsch sighs : " ninety
percent of the german women who come in here don't even know what a
calorie is . " unconscious eating . west germany's government is doing
its level best to teach them, for the incidence of arteriosclerosis and
other fat-linked ailments is increasing relentlessly . the society for
nourishment sends 50 lady dieticians around the country giving
weight-reducing lectures, and has launched a counter-paunching
offensive aimed at leavening factory meals . the average west german
calorie intake is actually below u.s . and british levels, but such
statistics do not account for beer, which pours down teutonic throats
at the annual rate of 432 glasses (100 calories per glass) for each
man, woman and child . besides, the average german consumes more
starches and other lipogenic substances : 260 lbs . of potatoes, 155
lbs . of bread and 47 chocolate bars each year . german palates are not
easily weaned away from such belt-straining delicacies as roast goose
(500 calories for a good-sized helping) or kartoffelklosse (more than
100 each), their famed potato dumplings . throughout the country, women
hold their midmorning kaffeeklatsch at pastry shops that are as rich in
calorific temptation as the witch's cottage in hansel and gretel . tv
has also helped bring the country to polysaturation point by
encouraging what doctors call " unconscious eating . " to get through a
poker hand with maverick, germans consume vast quantities of pretzels
and pastries, and fill the gaps between snacks with
erfrischungsbonbons, refreshment candies . and they are increasingly
reluctant to take exercise . asks a garment industry official : " who
walks nowadays any more ? " top pots . if the automobile is a status
symbol in germany, so is the paunch . like julius caesar ( " let me
have men about me that are fat " ), german voters consider that sheer
heft makes a politician more kreditwurdig, or trustworthy . while
konrad adenauer has remained reasonably trim, many other politicians
have visibly gone to pot . bundestag leader heinrich von brentano was a
skinny 150-pounder when he was first elected in 1949, now weighs around
210 . former war minister franz josef strauss weighs about 270 lbs .
many top officers, notably bundeswehr inspector general friedrich
foertsch, also sport unmartial potbellies . undisputed champion is
adenauer's chosen successor, stocky (5 ft . 10 in . economics minister
ludwig erhard, who weighs about 220 lbs., but has soared far higher on
occasion . whenever a crisis threatens, such as the metalworkers'
strike last may, germans cry : " let the fat man handle it . " after
settling the strike, erhard drew roar of approval with the modest brag
: " i threw my whole weight into it . " some observers consider
waistline inflation to be merely " a cultural lag " that will be
corrected as germans accept the idea that good times are there to stay
. others, including sociologist rene konig, contend that german
corpulence is a symptom of subconscious anxiety and guilt . if only for
that reason, there seems little likelihood that germans will ever again
want lean and hungry leaders . " a thin erhard ? " asks konig . "
never . why, people wouldn't believe in west germany's prosperity . "
