great britain a foolish display for three days
london's genteel west end looked like a battlefield . near buckingham
palace, squads of police grappled with leather-jacketed toughs, while
chauffeured bentleys delicately inched their way through . wild-eyed
girls with straggly black hair and bluejeaned boys with golden tresses
were frog-walked into paddy wagons . some 200 people were jailed .
taking advantage of the chaos, a six-man gang waylaid the dowager
duchess of northumberland, sped off in a white jaguar with her jewels,
worth $200,000 . most shocking of all, for the first time in her
eleven-year reign, queen elizabeth ii was booed by her own people .
cause of the trouble was the longexpected, long-disputed state visit to
britain by greece's king paul and queen frederika . fearing precisely
the kind of left-wing demonstrations that occurred last week, greek
premier constantine karamanlis advised against the trip, resigned when
the royal couple refused to bow to pressure and decided to go anyway .
british political critics base their case against the king and queen
largely on the fact that greek jails still contain about 1,000
prisoners seized more than a decade ago during the civil war ; most
are believed to be communist, and the greeks point out that they are
being gradually released anyway (the original number of prisoners was
4,000) . the queen is also accused of nazi sympathies, an old and
absurdly exaggerated charge, and of meddling too much in greek
politics, hardly a british concern . the antigreek chorus is made up of
a motley collection of communists, socialists, anti-monarchists, vague
crusaders in search of new causes, ban-the-bombers (including that
foolish sage, bertrand russell), all of them joined in the london
streets by joy-riding beatniks . amazingly, they were also joined, in
spirit, by labor party leader harold wilson and deputy leader george
brown, who chose to boycott a banquet for the visitors which could only
raise questions about the mental health and stability of british
politics . born
princess of hanover, frederika is a granddaughter of kaiser wilhelm ii
(and a great-great-granddaughter of britain's queen victoria, which
also makes her a british princess and a third cousin of queen
elizabeth) . when frederika was a year old, her family moved from
germany to austria . as a girl, she supposedly belonged to a hitlerite
youth group . in school in italy during her late teens, at a time when
three of her brothers served in the wehrmacht, she was heard to defend
nazi germany . that is about the only fact critics can cite to support
their case . after marrying paul in 1938, frederika fled greece under
nazi bombardment, lived in exile in egypt and south africa till war's
end .
agents in overalls . for the royal
visit, the macmillan government mounted a security force that outdid
even the bulganin-khrushchev welcome in 1956 . on hand were 5,000
police, including plainclothesmen disguised in everything from morning
coats to overalls . as the royal procession of carriages clipclopped
from victoria station, where elizabeth greeted them, to buckingham
palace, a woman burst from the crowd and shrieked : " release my
husband ! " she turned out to be mrs . betty ambatielos, 45, the
english wife of antonios ambatielos, a greek communist serving a life
term for his part in the civil war . that night, while the royal
couples and 156 other guests dined in buckingham palace, 2,000
demonstrators poured into trafalgar square with banners proclaiming "
down with the nazi queen . " the crowd seemed bent on storming the
palace but encountered massed lines of bobbies blocking the way .
police helmets clattered across sidewalks, fists flew, traffic stalled,
and prancing police horses bowled over crowds . rioters fought off cops
from atop a doubledeck bus . a few youths who made it to the mall were
stopped by flying tackles . " seig heil ! " for the next night, so
that the royal party could see shakespeare's a midsummer night's dream
in near-perfect security, the foreign office had bought up all 1,100
tickets to the aldwych theater, distributed them to a select audience
that included leaders of london's greek community . shortly before
curtain time, a false report that a bomb had been planted in the
theater led to the additional spectacle of police in evening clothes
combing the royal box with a mine detector . held back by six rows of
police, 1,500 people outside greeted the royal arrivals with an ugly
din of boos, hisses and mocking shouts of " sieg heil ! " and "
fascist swine . " thousands of others cheered . after the play, queen
elizabeth left the theater alone, and was greeted by another chorus of
boos . she looked startled and dismayed . it was probably the first
time that british royalty had been so publicly humiliated at home since
edward vii was hissed at epsom in the last century after rumor involved
him as a correspondent in a divorce case . worse than woolly . next
day, greek premier panayotis pipinelis, who accompanied the king and
queen, granted mrs . ambatielos a 45-minute hearing, whereupon she
calmed down . back in greece, 19 of the prisoners (not including
ambatielos) were freed . at week's end the royal couple quietly
returned to greece . said frederika before she left : " the decision
to come to britain for a state visit was the right one, absolutely
right . i am not worried about those few people who demonstrated . the
memory i have is of the warm reception we were given on our arrival . "
in britain the foolish display of the anti-greek demonstrators left
unpleasant echoes . those behind the riots, wrote the daily mirror, "
are not merely leading woolly-minded undergraduates in woolly-minded
peace protests ; they are providing a shield for mischievous communist
agitation . " the paper noted that " greece is about the only country
in eastern europe free from dictatorship, " then posed a question that
self-advertised idealists have yet to answer : when was the last time
they demonstrated in behalf of the political prisoners of lithuania or
estonia or latvia or poland or hungary or rumania or bulgaria or east
germany or czechoslovakia ?
