malaysia the quads quintuplets were expected, quadruplets
appeared . that was the story in london last week when government and
colonial leaders signed the birth certificate of a new british
commonwealth nation . it was the federation of malaysia, which was to
be composed of independent malaya, self-governing singapore, and the
three british territories of sarawak, brunei and north borneo . but at
the last moment, the oil-sodden sultanate of brunei pulled out of the
agreement in a fit of pique over the final terms of federation . macy's
v . gimbels . brunei's sudden defection came after weeks of
cliffhanging negotiations between malaya's shrewd prime minister tunku
(prince) abdul rahman, father of the federation scheme, and singapore's
brilliant, mercurial prime minister lee kuan yew . though the tunku had
demanded that singapore kick in 55 per cent of its revenues to the
federal treasury, lee managed to whittle the figure down to 40 per cent
. but overplaying his hand, he then held out for 39 per cent . so
infuriated was the tunku at this macy's v . gimbels tactic that he
delivered an ultimatum to singapore to get in the federation or stay
out and refused to go to london for the final bargaining sessions . in
london lee demanded that the british compensate singapore for continued
use of the island's naval and military facilities . britain came
through with an offshore island and an officers' club golf course,
which lee promised to turn into a botanical garden . but when the
negotiations turned to such basic matters as singapore's continued
status as a free port and its financial contribution to the
underdeveloped borneo territories, the discussions bogged down . as the
impasse continued, commonwealth secretary duncan sandys took over as
arbitrator . sandys' " absolute dedication and zeal, " said lee, "
equaled that of any dedicated communist i've ever had the misfortune to
meet . " goading, guiding, persuading, cajoling, sandys kept the
negotiators up to the small hours of the morning for four consecutive
nights . " on every occasion, we passed the time when cinderella
crumbled, " said lee . " on two occasions, we greeted the dawn . "
sulking sultan . when a breakthrough seemed near, abdul rahman flew to
london, sat in his hotel suite waiting for the signing ceremony . when
a last obstacle appeared, sandys persuaded lee to iron it out privately
with the tunku . the final agreement compromised on financial issues .
singapore will loan money to the borneo territories rather than give it
outright, and a federation common market will gradually replace
singapore's free-port status . brunei's withdrawal only slightly
jeopardizes this arrangement . brunei's rich, reactionary sultan is
mainly sulking over abdul rahman's apathy toward his ambition to play a
big ceremonial role in the new malaysia . but both the sultan and the
tunku privately admit their readiness to renew negotiations .
optimistically, the tunku announced : " this family has been nicely
settled . there is going to be a happy malaysia . /
