south viet nam suicide in many forms a south vietnamese novelist
and politician named nguyen tuong tam sent his sons out to buy a bottle
of whisky one night last week . for a while he sat drinking with them
at his home in saigon . " my sons, i feel very happy tonight, " he said
. " i am going to die very soon . " suddenly he keeled over, was rushed
to a hospital where he died next morning . in his glass was found a
lethal dose of cyanide . novelist tam, 58, was a revolutionary leader
in indo-china's war against the french . but after independence in
1954, he grew increasingly disenchanted with the authoritarian rule of
south viet nam's president ngo dinh diem . fortnight ago, diem's
government charged tam and 34 others with treason by conspiring to
overthrow the president in an abortive coup attempt in november 1960 .
it was just two days before the scheduled trial that tam committed
suicide, and he explained why in a note he left behind . " the arrest
and trial of all nationalist opponents of the regime is a crime that
will force the nation into the hands of the communists, " he wrote . "
i oppose this crime, and i kill myself as a warning to those people who
are trampling on our freedoms . " dragging feet . diem's government
moved quickly to head off demonstrations over tam's death, posthumously
acquitted him of all conspiracy charges at the saigon treason trial .
at the same time, the prosecutors tried to implicate the u.s . as being
behind the 1960 coup ; the charge was vigorously denied by the u.s .
at the end of the trial, government judges sentenced 20 defendants to
prison terms ranging from five to eight years ; nine others who had
fled the country after the attempted coup were sentenced to death in
absentia . tam's suicide and the saigon trial served once again to
stoke south viet nam's smoldering religious and political crisis . last
month buddhist monk thich quang duc burned himself to death on a saigon
street corner in protest against restrictions imposed on the country's
12 million buddhists by diem's predominantly roman catholic regime .
after a series of nationwide demonstrations, the government, under u.s
. prodding, yielded to buddhist demands and granted them equal
religious and political standing with the nation's 1,500,000 catholics
. but influenced by his brother, ngo dinh nhu, who believes that the
buddhists are red dupes, the militantly catholic diem has dragged his
feet in implementing these concessions . many vietnamese buddhists,
says nhu, " have become fanatic, lost their common sense, and are ready
to follow anyone who knows how to exploit them under the banner of
religion . " this was the kind of dogged anti-buddhist attitude that
has dangerously undercut government support . already one general has
resigned his field command in protest over government bungling of the
buddhist issue . simple reason . diem's
intransigence has dismayed u.s . officials, who fear that mounting
buddhist discontent can only hinder the war effort against the viet
cong, just when it is beginning to go well . over the past year,
government forces and their 14,000 u.s . military " advisers " have
vastly increased their mobility and striking power against the red
guerrillas . more than 7,000 " strategic hamlets " have been built, now
protect 8,000,000 vietnamese from viet cong raids . despite all
misgivings, the u.s . still stands behind diem for a simple reason that
he himself spelled out in a blunt warning last week : " for a moment,
imagine that another government replaces this one : it could not help
resulting in civil war and dreadful dictatorship . " washington has
considered alternatives to diem, but fears that the confusion of a coup
could only benefit the viet cong and might end up with a regime no
better than the present one . thus u.s . ambassador frederick nolting,
who is soon to be replaced by henry cabot lodge, returned to saigon
from washington consultations last week with a personal message of
confidence for diem from john kennedy . but nolting also lightly rapped
diem on the knuckles for letting the buddhist crisis continue . " the
u.s . stands for and supports freedom of religion for all people, " he
said . " it would be a tragedy if the gains against the viet cong were
wiped out by dissensions among vietnamese citizens, who desire above
all freedom of choice for themselves and for their country .
watching one buddhist
demonstration in saigon last week, nine u.s . reporters were jostled by
government police and had their cameras smashed . the cops said the
reporters had started the row . the vociferously antidiem u.s . press
corps in saigon protested to president kennedy .
