cold war the spirit of moscow at times it was
almost more than western veterans of many anticommunist battles could
bear . " love, " said nikita khrushchev in moscow, " love and respect
for other people is what we need . " the love feast lasted all week .
the beaming smile splashing across khrushchev's moonface, the blunt,
back-slapping peasant humor, the friendly-bear quality of the soviet
boss when he decides to be amiable all these familiar traits were on
full display in moscow as u.s., british and russian diplomats sat down
to try to negotiate a nuclear test ban agreement . with painful
memories of the shortlived " spirit of geneva " in 1955 and the
evanescent " spirit of camp david " in 1959, u.s . officials refuse to
regard khrushchev's joviality as a true barometer of east-west
relations . yet from the atmosphere around the conference table, there
was evidence that a new and possibly somewhat more durable spirit of
moscow was in the making . detectable chair . the easy mood prevailed
from the moment the negotiators arrived . chief u.s . negotiator
averell harriman brought with him three tons of telephone equipment,
for the " hot line " that is to link the white house and the kremlin in
emergencies . at the first meeting, harriman, 71, was greeted by
khrushchev with a cheery " you're absolutely blooming . what are you
doing, counting your years backward ? " when britain's top envoy,
viscount hailsham, said that moscow's weather was better than london's,
khrushchev replied : " we could perhaps find some place for you here .
you could be an internee . " finally the principals sat down at the
conference table, accompanied by their top aides foreign minister
andrei gromyko, deputy foreign minister valerian zorin, and chief
disarmament negotiator semyon tsarapkin on the russian side, u.s .
ambassador foy kohler and british ambassador sir humphrey trevelyan for
the west . said khrushchev : " we begin immediately with the signing .
/ added gromyko : " then all that will remain will be to fill the
treaty in . " during the early sessions, it almost seemed that easy .
khrushchev said that, since it had been impossible to reach agreement
on a full ban in the past, the time had come to achieve more by
attempting less . he gave soviet approval to a limited ban which would
cover all tests except those underground, repeating his familiar
opposition to onsite inspections of possible underground blasts . as
usual, gromyko argued that such inspections were unnecessary anyway, in
view of long-range seismic detection devices . when the sudden crash of
an accidentally overturned chair startled the delegates, gromyko said
quickly : " this is confirmation that everyone detects it . " growled
hailsham : " it still needs inspection . /
selling mood .
arguing that underground
blasts can indeed be detected from far off but not differentiated from
earthquakes, the u.s . is nevertheless willing to defer the question .
as for khrushchev, he was in a selling mood . drawing out of the hat a
five-year-old soviet proposal, he called for the establishment of
inspection posts at airfields, highways, railroad stations and ports on
both sides of the iron curtain to reduce the possibility of surprise
attack . he also proposed 1) freezing or reduction of military budgets,
2) a reduction of the armed forces on both sides in east and west
germany, and 3) a nonaggression pact between the nato and warsaw pact
powers . he even seemed willing to accept the u.s . idea of parallel
but separate declarations instead of a formal pact, which would avoid
implicit u.s . recognition of the east german communist regime . the
sudden arrival in moscow of a high-level east german delegation that
included walter ulbricht's berlin specialist, immediately raised
speculation that berlin was on the agenda . but any possible deal
involving berlin or the balance of forces in europe would require u.s .
consultation with its allies . west germany wasted little time in
warning the u.s . that any agreement other than a test ban would not
only usher in a period of " false security " in europe, but would also
make it increasingly difficult for the u.s.'s european allies to heed
washington's pleas for higher nato military expenditures or to respect
the embargo of " strategic materials " to the east . no obstacles .
why, after years of stalling, is khrushchev pushing a test ban treaty
and a detente with the west ? western diplomats point to the
sino-soviet split as the main reason (see following story) engaged in
an all-out power struggle with the chinese, khrushchev presumably wants
a test ban treaty to demonstrate to communists all over the world the
feasibility of " peaceful coexistence . " nor would khrushchev mind
cutting down a little on the prohibitive cost of nuclear testing and
production, which impedes his oft-stated desire to raise living
standards in the soviet union . lastly, while a test ban would not be
binding on either france or red china, it would place the onus of
defying the agreement on them . president kennedy suggested at his
press conference last week that in the event of an accord, the three
negotiators go to geneva and get the signatures of the 17-nation geneva
disarmament conference . such an arrangement would box in the french
with something more than an " anglo-saxon " -soviet agreement from the
viewpoint of russia's quarrel with the chinese, it would also put such
geneva " neutrals " as egypt, burma and india on the record as
supporting a soviet-sponsored agreement . at week's end a test ban
agreement seemed near . bantering with harriman at a reception,
khrushchev said : " the talks are going on well . there have been no
obstacles . if they go on as they have, an agreement is in sight . "
