communists " get out of here " and so the
chinese went home . at the airport, when a western correspondent asked
teng hsiao-ping, the chief of peking's departing delegation, how the
talks had gone, he replied, " very good . " obviously, the opposite was
true . during their last week in moscow, while western negotiatiors
were feted and flattered, a kind of great wall surrounded the unwelcome
visitors from peking . from their isolated compound on moscow's lenin
hills, the red chinese delegates ventured out only in curtained black
chaika limousines for the short drive to peking's embassy ; on
alternate days they met with a soviet delegation, obviously to no
effect . khrushchev pointedly stayed away from the meetings, although
he was otherwise active in the diplomatic and social whirl . the moscow
film festival provided an excuse for lots of parties, at which western
envoys and soviet functionaries mixed amiably with such movie stars as
shelly winters, susan strasberg, yves montand and simone signoret . at
week's end khrushchev finally turned to his other guests and, in a
relatively gracious gesture, tossed the red chinese a farewell dinner .
although described as " friendly, " the meal could have produced little
beyond dyspepsia, for khrushchev had spoiled the table talk in advance,
delivering an oratorical blast at peking that in effect declared
political war on the chinese . the challenge . at a massive rally of
party bureaucrats and propagandists in the kremlin's palace of the
congresses, khrushchev spoke with such apoplectic vehemence that at one
point he groped for words and rhetorically begged the audience : "
help me out . " but he didn't need much help . angrily defending his
destalinization drive against peking's attacks, he demanded : " what
do they want ? to frighten our people, to bring back the days when a
man went to his job and did not know whether he would see his wife and
children again ? " dropping his voice to a dramatic whisper,
khrushchev said that letters to him from all over the country expressed
gratitude for ending the stalinist terror . then he added :. " if
stalin had died ten years earlier, it would have been even better . "
the soviet boss was equally contemptuous on the subject of peking's
warmongering foreign policy . " they say one should start a revolution,
a war, " he shouted, " and on the corpses and the ruins, a more
prosperous society will be created . and who would remain in this
prosperous society ? wouldn't the living envy the dead ? " directly
accusing the chinese of trying to unseat him, khrushchev dared peking
to take its case to the soviet people : " i declare to those who would
like to overthrow us i challenge you, comrades let's pick out any plant
or collective farm . you present your program and we will present ours
. you won't need armor or a pillow for protection . our people are
polite . they'll listen and say : " get out of here . /
bourgeois comrades . almost as vehement was
a 19,000-word open letter from the kremlin that called the chinese
liars, hypocrites and cowards . moscow dismissed the red chinese claim
to proletarian purity and accused them of trying to goad russia into
war with the u.s . printed in pravda, the soviet counterattack was
addressed to communist cadres throughout the world and it served notice
that moscow would push its platform before all 81 " fraternal " parties
at all costs . as the soviets themselves angrily pointed out, peking
was actively " organizing and supporting bands of renegade " reds in
seven nations throughout the world the sino-soviet quarrel has sharply
divided local communist parties, splitting race from race and continent
from continent . in europe the quarrel is noisiest among the italian
comrades . nowhere does the communist party seem more bourgeois ; for
just that reason, nowhere in europe has peking found more supporters
for its credo of all-out revolution . in padua a group of communist
party members, expelled for favoring peking, published a pamphlet
denouncing red bureaucrats who lived the sweet life, complete with "
wives and mistresses in jewels and furs . " some 30,000 italian reds,
many of them sons of prominent communists, have formed about 20
chapters of the chinese-italian friendship society . the rebels are
backed by funds believed to be channeled through the albanian legation
in rome ; they circulate propaganda material prepared by red chinese
specialists operating from a fancy villa in bern, switzerland . last
week communist party vice secretary luigi longo rushed to milan to put
down a rebellion of sinophiles, and explained that by appearing
moderate, italian reds have prospered at the polls . as he emerged from
the meeting, longo discovered the slogans " viva stalin, " / viva mao "
painted on nearby walls . airmail war . in africa and asia the split is
increasingly racial . the soviets are complaining that at the recent
asian-african solidarity conference in tanganyika, a red chinese
official told the moscow delegation : " the whites have nothing to do
here . " such a blatant racist line, argues moscow, is pursued in the
underdeveloped areas at russia's expense ; it " implants the sneaky
idea that the peoples of some regions are more revolutionary than
others . " india's communist movement has been deeply divided, but last
week formally lined up with khrushchev, just as an indian government
purchasing commission arrived in moscow shopping for arms to be used in
defense against the red chinese . in japan, most of whose communists
favor red china for ethnic reasons, the struggle has become pretty
petty, resulting in an airmail circulation war . soon after pravda
began to arrive in tokyo by air, peking's people's daily dropped its
seamail delivery, which used to take a month, and also took to the air
at no increase in postal rates to subscribers . the nightmare . though
the leadership of most latin american communist parties is firmly
pro-moscow, the rank and file lean toward peking . reds in brazil have
split into three rival sects . one of uruguay's top reds was recently
expelled for his red chinese sympathies ; however, the party newspaper
still accepts paid announcements from peking propagandists . as for the
beard, fidel's revolutionary sympathies lie with mao, but he knows
better than to bite nikita's hand, and last week he dutifully endorsed
the moscow line . still, red china has not given up hope of converting
castro . cuba is one of the few places in the world where both chinese
and russian technicians remain at work . this month peking happily
proclaimed that its experts have helped the cubans to raise 25,000
peking ducks . these sino-soviet duels around the world, as much as the
fruitless talks in moscow, have shattered any prospect of early
reconciliation . now that the moscow meeting has collapsed, both sides
in effect concede that what began as a charade of unity has become a
communist nightmare .
