south viet nam the buddhist crisis in saigon's huge xa
loi pagoda, buddhist monks and nuns were holding a 48-hour hunger
strike against the regime of south viet nam's president ngo dinh diem .
expecting trouble, police sealed off nearby streets with barbed wire .
to prevent a repetition of the ritualistic suicide last month, when a
protesting buddhist monk burned himself to death on a saigon street
corner, two fire trucks were on hand . suddenly, about 500
saffron-robed buddhist priests, laymen and women emerged from a nearby
alley and started to run toward the pagoda to join their fasting
fellow-buddhists . stymied by wire and police, the demonstrators sat
down in the middle of the street . riot squads arrived . armed with a
walkie-talkie radio, two sport-shirted american c.i.a . men delivered a
running commentary on events to headquarters . a monk with a portable
loudspeaker repeated : " we have been deceived many times and we no
longer have any faith in the regime . " government secret police in
civilian clothes yelled back that the buddhists were being exploited by
the communists . then the police charged the peaceful seated crowds,
causing one of the ugliest scenes in south viet nam's three-months-old
buddhist crisis . at gunpoint . with rifle butts, clubs and tommy-gun
clips, the cops battered the demonstrators . women who had fallen to
the pavement in the first police rush were savagely kicked . a young
girl had her head split open with a carbine butt, and as blood streamed
into her eyes, she was carted away in a police van . from the windows
of a brothel, girls shouted insults at the police until forced inside
at machine-gun point . throughout south viet nam, government forces
crushed buddhist demonstrations with similar violence, arrested nearly
300 marchers in saigon alone, following orders to " use any means " to
disperse buddhist demonstrations . top u.s . embassy people in saigon
were " shocked and disgusted " by the diem government's action . one
monk delivered a protest note to the embassy, urging the u.s . to force
diem to relent ; u.s . ambassador frederick e . nolting telephoned
vietnamese officials and got assurances that the man would not be
molested . but no sooner had the monk left than secret police agents
tried to spirit him away in a waiting taxi . the priest fought them off
and raced back toward the u.s . embassy . a u.s . official dragged him
to safety through the door as a husky marine guard peeled a vietnamese
cop from the priest's back . morality crusade . ironically, the crisis
involves one of the world's most docile religions . yet, in a sense,
that very quality makes buddhism a problem . since it knows no sense of
sin, and hence no reprisal for error, it is, at least by western
standards, passive, backward and neutral . buddhism, says theologian
paul tillich, " gives no decisive motives for social transformation,
and thus provides a nonpolitical opportunity for an invasion of
buddhist east asia by the communist quasi-religion with its hope for a
transformed world . " although the red chinese are wooing the buddhists
everywhere, there is no real evidence so far that the reds are using
south viet nam's buddhists, as the diem government charges . on the
other hand, diem has not succeeded in using them either unlike
thailand's strongman sarit thanarat, who has shown that,when handled
properly, they can be a solid, anti-communist force .
until recently, the buddhists
in south viet nam had no real case against diem . since the buddhists
were south viet nam's dominant group for centuries and resent roman
catholicism as the religion of their former french masters diem has
taken pains not to show obvious favoritism toward fellow catholics .
only three of 19 army generals and five of 17 cabinet ministers are
catholics . though nearly half of the 123-member national assembly is
catholic, this is largely because catholic schools turn out better
educated graduates than buddhist schools . most vietnamese nevertheless
believe that diem's catholic ruling family has shown bias . primarily
middle-class landowners, vietnamese catholics are economically far more
advanced than the buddhists . thousands of buddhists have become
converts to catholicism in the hope that this would help them
professionally or economically . buddhists claim that the government
gives catholics better land for schools and church buildings and
discriminates against buddhist students in granting state scholarships
. unlike other religious groups, buddhists must have special government
permits to hold large meetings . " this puts us in the same category as
the trade unions, " says one buddhist priest . with their free and easy
mores, buddhists also complain about the morality crusade of mme . ngo
dinh nhu, wife of diem's brother and closest adviser . mme . nhu has
banned polygamy, concubinage, dancing, and even fighting fish . hard
line . all these discontents need not have erupted if government troops
had not stupidly and brutally gunned down nine buddhist demonstrators
at a rally in hue two months ago . even then, the buddhist controversy
would probably have died down if the government had offered a public
apology, which is the buddhists' chief demand, along with such
practical matters as freedom of assembly, the right to fly their flag,
buddhist chaplains in the army . but brother ngo dinh nhu has always
urged a hard line . what he fears with some reason is that if diem
gives in even slightly to the buddhists, it would only cause new
demands that would eventually threaten the government's whole power
structure . by week's end, however, in a belated attempt to ease
tensions, the government ordered the release of 267 buddhists arrested
during the demonstrations . though head priest thich tinh khiet said
that he has lost confidence in diem's " high virtue, " no top buddhist
has yet openly asked for the overthrow of the diem government . but a
new type of buddhist leader is emerging young, well-educated, tough,
and impatient with the older men's relative restraint . as passions
mount and the police crack down harder, buddhists are being pushed into
a dangerous attitude of martyrdom . " we don't want a police state, "
says a buddhist priest . " we do not want terror or discrimination or
state control . we are loyal vietnamese, but the government treats us
like communists . we are willing to sacrifice ourselves and to die to
bring freedom to all the people of south viet nam . " . . . (tri-dot)
the communist viet cong was obviously trying to capitalize on the
buddhist crisis . stepping up their attacks, the red guerrillas wounded
14 u.s . advisers in a mortar barrage on a u.s . compound in can tho
and killed three americans when the reds shot up a u.s . medical convoy
north of saigon . a fourth adviser was killed later in the week when
jittery sentries began shooting at each other in the dark . the dead
brought to 89 the number of u.s . troops killed in the war in south
viet nam .
