syria throwing away the script syrian army revolts usually
resemble the ancient battles of chinese warlords : there is a head
count of men and material in the opposing armies and the larger wins a
bloodless victory . the losers are then jailed or exiled to wellpaying
diplomatic posts abroad . not so last week, when syria experienced its
twelfth attempted coup d'etat in 14 years and the only one to throw
away the script . led by ex-colonel jassem alwan, who had already
staged an unsuccessful coup last year, a band of army officers and
civilians launched a morning attack in damascus on the radio station
and the defense ministry . diplomats in britain's new green and yellow
embassy got off a cable home : " heavy fighting in the heart of the
city . " the gunfire lasted for four hours, and three syrian mig
fighter planes serving either the government, the rebels, or their own
whim knocked out the radio transmitter . when the radio limped back on
the air, it was still in government hands . the strongman of syria's
ruling baath (renaissance) party, general mohammed hafez, who is both
defense minister and army chief of staff, broadcast that the effort "
to disturb the peace " had been crushed . next day he announced the
break in the rules of syrian-style coups : eight rebel military men
and twelve civilians had been executed . hafez blamed the revolt on
syrian supporters of egypt's gamal abdel nasser, who is feuding with
baath-ruled syria over control of the proposed new arab federation but
mideastern observers could not understand why nasserites would begin a
revolt on the very day that syria's president louai atassi was flying
to cairo to make concessions to nasser . even baath party newspapers
conceded that syria was at last ready to accept nasser's demand for a "
national front " federation in which his supporters would have equal
strength with baath . after a ten-hour conference with nasser,
president atassi flew home and rushed to the military hospital to kiss
the soldiers wounded in defending his regime . at week's end damascus
radio was still making brief, shrill broadcasts insisting that the
revolt was crushed, bu the country remained buttoned up against the
outside world, with borders, airports and harbors sealed .
