france l'amour for la patrie the people of paris celebrated
summer in the traditional way . young couples were laced together under
the trees of the bois de boulogne, locked lip-to-lip on the metro
stairs, snuggled flank-to-flank on the swimming barges moored along the
seine . to the gaullists in the national assembly there was only one
thing wrong with this surfeit of love : it is not producing enough
babies . introducing new legislation designed to change that situation,
ex-premier michel debre warned : " there is a direct and immediate
link between the weight of our population and our future in europe and
the world . " no explosion . debre could have appealed to history .
when napoleon's armies swept over the continent 160 years ago, france
contained one-fifth of europe's population . today it represents
one-twentieth, and only immigration has kept france from losing
population . since 1946, france's annual birth rate has stabilized at
between 18 and 19 per 1,000 people . though well below the u.s . rate
of 23.4, france is now actually doing better than most of its neighbors
. in western europe generally, the birth rate has slowly but steadily
declined over the past decade, possibly because of postwar uneasiness
about the future, the shortage of new housing that continues despite
the economic boom, and the decision of newlyweds to space the arrival
of children . the decline is even more rapid in the communist
countries, especially poland and yugoslavia, where the rate has dropped
from 28 to 22 per 1,000 in the same period, partly because communist
governments sanction legal abortions . thus, ironically, while asia,
africa and south american still fear the population explosion, europe
fears the opposite . no drinking . france has long fought the trend by
offering bonuses for large families and by severely outlawing abortions
as well as female contraceptive devices and the spread of birth control
information . to achieve a national average of at least three children
per family, debre last week proposed 1) priority in apartments for
young couples with children, 2) tax exemptions to families in the year
they produce a fourth child, 3) a more " receptive government attitude
toward unwed mothers . " he also wants frenchmen to lay off the bottle,
because " each generation we lose a total of 500,000 persons due to
overindulgence . " opposition came from socialist and communist
deputies who argued that it was unrealistic to talk of increasing the
population while french housing remained in its present wretched state
. but debre is strongly backed by president charles de gaulle, who
hopes that france's present population of 47 million will grow to 100
million by the century's end .
