cold war the nonsigners in washington the ambassadors were ushered
into a floodlit anteroom and welcomed by virginia duke, a chic state
department employee with greying hair, who bears the title of treaty
depository officer . in moscow a variety of foreign office types
ushered the diplomats into a dazzling gold-and-white marble room in the
spiridonovka palace . in both cities, and in london as well, the
emissaries of nation after nation lined up to sign the nuclear test ban
treaty . eventually, by state department estimate, there will be more
than 100 signatories . khrushchev called it " a referendum on all
continents . " inevitably, the world's attention focused on the
nonsigners . chief among them is, of course, red china . heightening
their bitter ideological quarrel with moscow, the chinese charged that
four years ago nikita khrushchev had welshed on a promise to help them
make atomic bombs because he wanted to present " a gift " to president
eisenhower on the eve of the camp david talks . in a bitter radio
attack, the chinese said that the " real aim of the soviet leaders " in
negotiating the test ban " is to compromise with the u.s . in order to
maintain a monopoly of nuclear weapons and lord it over the socialist
camp . " peking added that khrushchev had committed an act of "
betrayal " resulting in " open capitulation by the soviet leaders to
u.s . imperialism . " the slow ones . china's antitreaty stand was
backed by avowedly pro-peking albania, north korea and north viet nam .
so far, these are the only countries that have formally announced that
they will not sign . but chary of angering the chinese, other asian
nations have been slow to indicate their approval of the pact . they
include nepal, which lies in an exposed position in china's border
conflict with india ; ceylon and cambodia, both leftwing " neutrals "
; and indonesia, which is hopeful of chinese support in any future
action against the soon-to-be-born malaysian federation . to moscow's
consternation, the only communist nation that has not yet spoken out
one way or the other in the worldwide " referendum " is cuba . despite
the $1,000,000 a day that russia is pouring into his island commune,
fidel castro is still angry over khrushchev's withdrawal of soviet
rockets last fall . trying to make the soviet leader sweat, castro is
obviously attempting to boost his price for supporting russia in its
struggle with the chinese . but there is little doubt that cuba will
ultimately sign the treaty, for castro needs russia to buy his
3,800,000-ton sugar crop and to continue steady transfusion of economic
aid . the lonely ones . the sole nonsigner in the western camp is
france . even franco spain, the only western country which does not
have diplomatic relations with moscow, has signed the treaty, leaving
france isolated from all its continental neighbors . most galling to
charles de gaulle was west germany's decision to sign the pact after a
reassuring pitch in bonn by u.s . secretary of state dean rusk . bonn's
action was doubly upsetting to france, for it followed an announcement
that germany and the u.s . will cooperate in the development of a new
battle tank (time, aug . 16) ; just three months ago, paris was unable
to reach an agreement with the germans on a similar project . both bonn
decisions raised the question of just how much the franco-german
friendship treaty is worth, and brought into the open the fact that
west germany still looks to the u.s . and not to france for leadership
. stubbornly france prepared for another atomic test in the sahara, but
de gaulle's aspirations to french leadership of europe were acidly
demolished by paris' le figaro . " if khrushchev really becomes
disturbed by the campaign conducted against him by china, " said the
paper, " and if he wants to have a certainty of peace on his western
front, then he will not come to seek agreement with france, which is
negligible in his eyes, even with atomic weapons, but with the u.s.,
whose influence and power are one hundred times superior . this was
proved at the recent conference in moscow, where we shone by our
absence .
