west germany it is still there two years have passed since
berlin was severed by the wall . on its anniversary last week, most
west berliners heeded official appeals to refrain from violent, futile
demonstrations . instead, they observed the day quietly by placing
wreaths on the dozens of crosses marking each spot where a fleeing east
german had been shot to death by communist guards . only late in the
evening was the city's grave calm broken by a mob of some 2,000
hell-raising west berliners who surged into the area around checkpoint
charlie, hurling rocks and insults across the wall into the soviet
sector . if germans have learned to live with the berlin wall and the
deadly, 830mile barricade that divides the rest of their nation, on
neither side have they forgotten or forgiven its existence . the most
eloquent evidence of east germans' refusal to accept sovietization is
that 16,456 of them have risked their lives and fled to the west since
the wall went up . among them were 1,304 members of east germany's army
and police force, enough to form 13 companies . at least 65 more east
germans are known to have been killed while attempting to escape .
facts of life . despite this somber chronicle of flight and death, many
politicians and pundits outside germany still cling to the notion based
in part on deep-rooted fear of resurgent german power that its people
are gradually becoming reconciled to their country's partition . in
west germany itself, this view is accepted in some quarters, mostly
because it is a fact of present european life that the russians cannot
be moved out of east germany, except by war, a west german surrender to
communism, or some kind of settlement for which west germany might have
to pay a ruinous price . as a result, many germans are beginning to
ponder measures that fall short of actual reunification such as trade
pressure designed to persuade walter ulbricht to give east germans a
little more freedom and a somewhat better life . franz thedieck, state
secretary for all-german affairs, said recently : " of course we would
like to see germany reunited, but if there were conditions of freedom
in east germany the existence of one single german state would not be
absolutely necessary . " existential philosopher karl jaspers created a
furor by suggesting in 1960 that his countrymen must accept changes in
the map of germany as part of their liability for hitler . many germans
now accept his thought : " the only thing that counts is freedom .
compared with that, reunification is a matter of indifference the
thought is largely academic, since it would be almost as difficult to
liberalize the ulbricht regime as to get the russians out of east
germany . the jaspers line thus may temper but does not eliminate the
basic urge for reunification in a country which achieved national unity
later than other european nations and is fiercely insistent on its
ethnic identity . hence bonn's opposition to any east-west agreement
that would formally or psychologically seal the status quo . says a
western ambassador in bonn : " the issue of german unity still has
more explosive potential than any other issue on the political scene in
germany today . we'd be fools to underestimate it . " shift to right .
far from symbolically and physically sealing germany's division, the
wall has become a constant, inescapable reminder to west germany's 57
million citizens that 17 million of their compatriots live in privation
and terror . older germans, including distinguished sociologist helmut
schelsky, have warned repeatedly that a complacent younger generation
will in time come to regard their compatriots " over there " as
foreigners . however, german students on the whole seem to agree with
christa roll, a 23-year-old munich student, who argues that idealistic
youngsters have been deeply affected by the wall . since it went up,
she says, " the intellectual center of gravity has shifted to the right
. before that, a lot of liberals would still put in a good word for
east germany now and then . but the wall changed them, for it was
exactly the kind of ugly suppression that every progressive is
supposedly fighting against . " most germans even those who acknowledge
that reunification cannot become reality in the foreseeable future
agree that it is a moral imperative . recent opinion polls show that 54
per cent of west germany's citizens consider their country's division "
an unbearable situation . " another survey, taken last year, indicated
that 40 per cent consider reunification the nation's most urgent
problem ; only 17 per cent gave first priority to the preservation of
peace . evidence of their continuing concern for their kin is the rise
in west germans' shipments of food and clothing to communist germany :
from 35 million in 1950, the number of packages crossing the border has
risen to more than 52 million a year . a whole new literature in west
germany concerns itself with the alienation of east and west, " the
dreaded dreadful strangeness, " as uwe johnson wrote in speculations
about jakob, in which friends and relatives divided by the border
gradually cease to be individuals in each other's eyes, instead become
political symbols . emotionally, at least, a united nation remains the
aspiration of a vast majority of west germans . the u.s . would only
pave the way for a new and dangerous wave of german nationalism by
ignoring it .
