congo republic failure of a fetish once on a
state visit to paris, abbe fulbert youlou, president of the republic of
the congo, shook hands with charles de gaulle and boasted : " like
you, i am irreversible . " last week, on the third anniversary of his
country's independence, youlou was reversed right out of office by an
explosion of his people's pent-up discontent . his country, the
ex-french colony called the " other congo " to distinguish it from its
anarchic ex-belgian neighbor, has long seemed quiet and peaceful . but
when it came, youlou's exit had all the revolutionary trimmings,
including a storming of the local bastille and a mob outside the palace
howling for bread .     nnnn
habitually clad in a cassock often topped by a homburg, and said to
have carried a pistol in his robes, youlou at 46 was one of the world's
most unusual statesmen . a member of the lari tribe his name means "
fetish which cannot be grasped " he was reared by catholic missionaries
and in 1946 ordained a priest . later, in defiance of orders from his
superior, youlou ran for the french assembly (he lost) and was
suspended by the church, is still forbidden to say mass . because of
his suspension, he was acclaimed by his countrymen as a victim of
discrimination and elected mayor of brazzaville in 1956 . exploiting
congolese superstitions, he soon had many voters convinced that his
personal fetish, a small yellow crocodile, had " the power . " with the
advent of independence, youlou was elected premier and president,
promising his new nation " tomorrows that sing . " he ordered a paris
couturier to run up a wardrobe of cassocks, in colors from mauve to
bottle green . he savored imported champagne by the case and
constructed a luxury hotel ; when asked how he financed it, he replied
: " i am spending the savings of poor maman . she sold nuts and
vegetables . " rise of the critics . meanwhile the country's
timber-based economy stagnated . this year france cut off its
$1,100,000 annual dole, and youlou raised taxes . basic food prices
doubled, and as bush people kept streaming into crowded brazzaville, 19
out of every 20 africans in the city were without work . then youlou
made his worst mistake he asked guinea's demagogic, leftish president
sekou toure for a visit . instead of uttering niceties, the guest
electrified the locals with denunciations of african leaders who turn
wealthy bourgeois . last month brazzaville's three trade unions, one of
which is communist, demanded reforms . youlou promised labor a say in a
new, single-party government that he planned to proclaim . satisfied,
the unions eased off . but fortnight ago, word began circulating that
youlou was about to renege . promptly the unions called a general
strike ; last week, on the eve of the strike, two labor leaders were
arrested . fall of the messiah . as the walkout began, brazzaville was
shut tight, and 1,500 demonstrators gathered for a morning rally at the
railroad station . suddenly mounted congolese gendarmes charged them
with sabers flashing . the ragged mob burst through police lines and
surged toward the city prison, hurling stones and bricks . at the
prison entrance, police opened fire, killing at least three .
undeterred, the mob battered down the steel gate, freed 480 elated
prisoners . moving on, the rioters set about burning homes and cars of
government officials .
both call themselves
republic of the congo, list themselves unofficially by the names of
their capitals : congo (brazzaville) and congo (leopoldville)
from his palace, youlou pleaded with the french commander of the
congolese troops to take more vigorous action . " shoot, shoot, "
youlou cried, covering his ears . but his appeal was in vain . although
the french had 3,000 of their own men in the country under a defense
treaty, and air-lifted in another 1,000, orders from paris were only to
protect the presidential palace and french property . on the radio,
youlou announced a government reshuffle, but it was too late . next
morning the mob, now swollen to 10,000, again poured out of the city's
two shantytowns . one man was heard to cry : " i have not worked in
six months . i have not eaten in three days . " finally, resplendent in
a white cassock, youlou appeared on the palace steps, announced that he
had resigned to prevent a bloodbath . with a thunderclap of cheers, the
crowd broke up peacefully, and within hours brazzaville was back to
normal . taking over, the army chose as provisional premier alphonse
massamba-debat, 42, a moderate leftist and former youlou cabinet
minister who fell from favor . in contrast to his catholic predecessor,
massamba-debat is protestant . appointed with him was a seven-man
cabinet of french-trained technicians that failed to include any union
leaders . massamba-debat hinted at prompt elections . as for fulbert
youlou, he had saved his head at least so far, was spirited away to an
army camp for safekeeping . announced massamba-debat : " there will be
no reprisals against monsieur youlou . he is a congolese nobleman . "
