great britain the shock of today (see cover)
the signs and symbols of prosperity are everywhere in britain, crowding
the past, complicating the present . along rolling roman roads and
winding country lanes, past sleeping norman churches and whitewashed
farms, weekend traffic flows like an invading army . london's raw new
office buildings jostle georgian mansions ; a hilton hotel stares
impertinently down onto buckingham palace . bowling alleys and dance
halls are packed each night of the week . on city rooftops, tv antennas
stand as thick as the english archers at agincourt . in one decade, the
number of cars on the roads has doubled (to 6,000,000), though the
entire island boasts only 190 miles of expressway . most britons earn
twice as much as they did in 1949, and they are gambling and betting
their lolly at the stupefying rate of $3 billion a year . one of
london's most exquisite 18th century houses opened recently as an
opulent gambling club . in the past two years, bingo palaces and
betting shops have mushroomed throughout the country, which some now
call " the windfall state . " these days, more than 3,500,000 " insular
/ britons go abroad each year mostly to the continent, where darts and
marmalade and tea at 4 : 30 are now an accepted part of the rites of
summer . britons are better educated and in better health than ever
before and need pay no doctors' bills . yet, for all their heady new
affluence, the british today feel disturbed and insecure . their
troubled mood is indefinable but inescapable . it is a sense of unease
in which is blended the awareness of national decline, the conscious
sense of failure to find new outlets for their energies, a feeling that
many of their hallowed institutions and traditions are increasingly
irrelevant to a formidably changed world . two rings . the nation's
commerce and industry, its education and ethics, were all developed to
meet the challenge of global power . its history books and literature
reverberate with the names of soldier-heroes and the battlefields on
which they won and held an empire : omdurman and lucknow, quebec,
khartoum, mafeking . in every corner of their island, statues and
street names still celebrate a glory that has passed . " you used to
open the atlas, " muses a manchester businessman, " and half the world
was red . now britain is just a little red speck off the coast of
europe . " suez cruelly demonstrated to the world that it takes power
to be a power . but even then, britons could not come to terms with the
harsh reality of vanished might . their feeling of shock today is all
the greater because it has been so long delayed . as if by some
malevolent design, a whole series of frustrations and failures has
beset britannia in a few short months, deepening the nation's angst .
the abrupt u.s . cancellation of the skybolt missile rudely exposed the
fact that britain's " independent " nuclear deterrent is in fact almost
wholly dependent on washington . there was a time when u.s . presidents
sought britain's counsel and even approval before taking any major
initiative in world affairs ; in the cuban crisis, the most perilous
of the last few years, the celebrated jack-mac telephone rang just
twice . back on the dole . britain's insecurity has been exacerbated by
14 long months of haggling with the europeans . swallowing their pride
and reversing centuriesold tradition, the british decided in mid1961 to
cross the channel and make common cause with the continent . then last
week, just as they were within sight of their goal, charles de gaulle
of france contemptuously closed the door on perfidious albion . even at
home, the storm signals were flying . once again the lines of
unemployed workers are lengthening outside labor exchanges . the
half-forgotten word " dole " is back in the language . britain's
overall unemployment rate of 2.6 per cent , though mild by u.s .
standards, is at a four-year peak and still rising . moreover, most of
the 600,000 men without jobs are concentrated in a few dozen " black
spots " in the north, where in some communities up to 14 per per cent
of the work force is on the dole ($13 a week for a married man) .
gap nonetheless, britain's prosperity is poised on a knife edge . in
the past decade, its economy has grown only 2fy per year on average ;
in 1962 it rose only 1 per cent , whereas in the common market even a 4
per cent growth rate is considered disappointing . since 1950,
balance-of-payments crises have brought britain to the brink of
bankruptcy six times . by draconian measures the government succeeded
last year in boosting exports 3 per cent for a new $11 billion postwar
record, helping to maintain gold and hard-currency reserves . however,
it was only able to achieve stability by cutting back credit and
curbing industrial expansion . " other countries have had their
economic miracles, " sighs a manchester journalist . " britain has had
its crises . " britain needed urgently to expand its markets and
broaden its shaky financial base . once inside europe, british industry
was confident that it could substantially boost exports to the six . it
also anticipated a heavy influx of investment capital from u.s . and
other foreign companies eager to have a british toehold in the common
market . if britain were finally excluded from europe, investment would
continue to dwindle and britain might be forced as a result to make
drastic cuts in its living standards . meanwhile, it may either retreat
behind high tariff walls or else return to its classic ideal of free
trade, possibly in association with the u.s . and european nations
outside the market . this week, as m.p.s flocked back to westminster
from the christmas recess, unemployment threatened to be an even more
explosive issue than the collapse of the common market negotiations .
the government's best asset in time of crisis has always been the prime
minister, a political machoudini who can slither out of almost any trap
by sheer sleight-of-hand . undisturbed by the country's mounting
frustration over unemployment and housing, macmillan did not swing into
action until last summer, after the tories had suffered the worst
series of by-election reverses inflicted on a british government in 40
years . in his third and most drastic cabinet reshuffle since he took
office, macmillan purged half his ministers, handed key posts to some
of the brightest young politicians east of the new frontier . to ginger
up the faltering economy, new chancellor of the exchequer reginald
maudling cut interest rates, gave generous new tax concessions to
industry, slashed purchase taxes on autos and a wide range of consumer
goods . to speed homebuilding and slum clearance a task that macmillan
himself discharged with distinction in his first cabinet post in 1951
the prime minister brought in sir keith joseph, 45, an astute
politician and onetime construction company executive, and gave him the
go-ahead for a major public-works program . geoffrey rippon, 38, the
party's " back-room " housing expert, was assigned to streamline
archaic building codes and techniques . two weeks ago, as unemployment
kept rising and support for the government slumped to an alltime low
(36 per cent v . 45 per cent for labor), macmillan assigned lord
hailsham, his minister of science and former party chairman, to make a
crash effort to help the worst depressed areas as cabinet minister
responsible for the northeast . the government does not have to call an
election for 21 months . it has recently seemed likely, however, that
macmillan would go to the people in the coming fall . by then,
politicians figured, britain would have made her triumphal entry into
the common market, and the government's pump priming would have thinned
the unemployment rolls and reinvigorated the economy . but after last
week's dimming of hopes for a prompt entry into europe, the government
may feel constrained to seek a new mandate even earlier . the
conservatives have been in power for eleven straight years, the longest
unbroken innings that any party has enjoyed since the 23-year tory
reign that ended in 1830 . sixteen by-election setbacks for the tories
in the past year have badly dented macmillan's prestige . until hugh
gaitskell's death last week, a tory defeat in the next elections seemed
at least a possibility . against a demoralized, leaderless opposition,
the conservative chances are far brighter for the fourth straight
electoral victory . some experts speculate that harold macmillan may
decide to step down after the election . he has no clear heir, but
deputy prime minister r . arab " ) butler, an astute tactician who is
distrusted by tory rightwingers, would succeed him if macmillan were
removed tomorrow .
