liechtenstein 2-12 the happy have-not at last count, there were 72
princes and princesses of liechtenstein, which is eleven more
highnesses than there are square miles in the minuscule principality .
luckily for the postal system, only a dozen von und zu liechtensteins
actually live in liechtenstein . indeed, it was not until 1937 that a
hereditary ruler actually made his home in the drafty, 13th century
family fortress, whose battlements rise starkly above the capital of
vaduz (pronounced vahdootz) . there last week, amid eulogies and
thunderous renditions of heil liechtenstein, franz josef ii maria aloys
alfred karl johannes heinrich michael georg ignatius benediktus
gerhardus majella, its twelfth reigning prince, observed his 57th
birthday and the 25th anniversary of his accession to the throne . for
fear of overcrowding its pocket paradise, liechtenstein (pop . 18,000)
has granted citizenship to only a dozen foreigners since 1950, and
worries mightily over its rising birth rate . an unsullied blend of
lush meadowland and soaring alpine peaks, the nation nestles so
unobtrusively between austria and switzerland (since 1924 it has shared
currency, customs services and foreign service with the swiss) that
vacationers driving through are often unaware that they are even in
franz josef's fief . this bothers liechtenstein's government not at
all, for, as prime minister alexander frick once observed, the sight of
idle tourists could prove unsettling to the country's hard-working
peasants . salami for rubbernecks . even to shuttle summer traffic
through the country, liechtenstein grudgingly has to double its police
force, which consists normally of 18 men and a dog named rex . the
well-named quick tourist office concentrates its energies on selling
visitors swiss watches, belgian francs and liechtenstein cuckoo clocks,
which are made in west germany . since the country's medieval castles
bear signs saying " no castle visiting, " insistent rubbernecks usually
get to see the salami skin factory or else one of two plants where
strikingly healthy liechtensteiners turn out false teeth and artificial
limbs for world markets . though it boasts one of the world's highest
living standards, german-speaking liechtenstein is in every happy sense
a have-not nation : it has no unemployment, slums, communists, crime,
tv or radio station, airports, divorces or billboards . neutral in both
world wars, it has had no soldiers since 1939, when the only remaining
warrior died in bed . its maximum income tax rate is 10 per cent ;
corporate taxes are so liberal that more than 2,000 foreign firms have
registered headquarters in vaduz . while it is a constitutional
democracy, liechtenstein virtually dispenses with politics . there are
two parties, known as the reds and the blacks, but they are equally
conservative and anti-communist and even have the same motto : faith
in god, prince and fatherland . private leonardo . liechtenstein also
has considerable faith in its wine, a sturdy rose that the government
refuses to export for fear of running dry . an even more jealously
guarded national treasure is franz josef's family art collection (time,
dec . 12, 1960), which consists of 1,500 paintings valued at $150
million . it includes the only leonardo da vinci in private ownership,
a lush portrait of a florentine maiden called the ginevra dei benci, as
well as 27 rubens paintings that are valued at $11 million, and
paintings by van dyck, brueghel, rembrandt and botticelli . the public
is allowed to see only 75 of franz josef's lesser pictures, which are
sandwiched into a modest building in vaduz along with the tourist
office and the national postage-stamp museum . the closest the
liechtenstein family comes to sharing its greatest paintings with the
world is allowing them to appear occasionally on one of the nation's
famed postage stamps . despite postwar losses of vast holdings in
communist czechoslovakia, franz josef ii is ranked among europe's ten
richest men . a grand-nephew of austrian archduke franz ferdinand,
whose assassination at sarajevo ignited world war i, the alert,
easygoing prince is also rated liechtenstein's most popular monarch
since johannes the good, who took the throne in 1858, reigned 71
years, and spent an impressive $18 million of his personal fortune to
build schools and roads in liechtenstein . though no one expected franz
joseph to spend as much, loyal leichtensteiners who crowded into the
palace last week prayed lustily that the prince and his beautiful,
41-year-old wife, princess gina, might reign as long as johannes . "
when the personality cult goes, " murmured one devoted bystander, "
liechtenstein goes too . " longer
than any other european monarch save france's louis xiv, who beat him
by a year .
