india thunder on left & right on the eve of the 16th anniversary
of indian independence, 2,000 demonstrators marched outside parliament
in delhi, waving banners and chanting : " leave the throne, jawaharlal
. " inside the horseshoe-shaped chamber, prime minister jawaharlal
nehru faced the first no-confidence motion in his 16 years in power .
the censure motion was sponsored by nehru's most outspoken political
foe, stooped, acerbic j . b . kripalani, a political independent who
was returned to parliament only two months ago in a surprising
by-election victory, after having been swamped by now discredited
ex-defense minister krishna menon in last year's general election .
kripalani proposed to censure the government among other things, over
official corruption, spiraling food prices and prohibitively high
taxation . though kripalani is pro-western, the censure proposal became
an umbrella for all kinds of other nehru critics, including leftists
angered by nehru's few tentative steps away from nonalignment . one
major leftist target was india's agreement to permit voice of america
broadcasts for three hours daily over a transmitter to be built by the
u.s . in calcutta, and nehru is now trying to back out of it . another
target : the joint air defense exercises that the indian air force
will soon hold with the u.s . and british air commands . in an effort
to silence his leftist critics, nehru has won extensive promises from
russia and its satellites for missiles, fighters, and small arms . top
government officials expect little in substance from soviet aid
promises, but insist that the symbolism of such aid is necessary to
maintain india's image of nonalignment . with nehru's congress party
holding a massive 229-seat plurality in parliament, there is no chance
that the censure motion will be carried . but nehru is plainly worried
over the rising opposition on both the right and the left and over the
by-election trend away from the party in what were once considered
impregnable congress constituencies . he has promised to shake up his
government and to demand the resignation of some cabinet ministers so
that they can work full time on organizational duties to revitalize the
party . nehru's plan is scorned by c . rajagopalachari, 84, leader of
india's small dynamic, free-enterprising swantantra party . "
theatricals do not cure diseases, " says c . r . " the congress party
is sick, and i do not want sick persons in charge of the government . "
