south viet nam suicide series it was the most macabre week in
south viet nam's three-month-old religious and political crisis . in
saigon, an 18-year-old girl tried unsuccessfully to cut off her left
hand " as a humble offering to buddha while our religion is in danger .
/ outside the coastal city of hue, a 17-year-old novice buddhist monk
wrapped himself in a kerosene-soaked, six-color buddhist flag, then
struck a match . in the village of ninhhoa, 200 miles north of saigon,
a young buddhist nun sat down in a catholic school playground and set
herself on fire . less than 24 hours later, back in hue, a 71-year-old
monk announced over the tudam pagoda loudspeaker that he was going to
kill himself, then burned himself to death in the pagoda's courtyard .
the quarrel spreads . the
three ritualistic suicides brought to five the number of buddhists who
have turned themselves into human torches in further protest against
the regime of south viet nam's roman catholic president ngo dinh diem .
the government reacted by placing the buddhist strongholds of hue and
nhatrang under virtual martial law . although worried that the burnings
might get out of hand, buddhist leaders defended the suicides as "
noble sacrifices, " were rounding up secular and military support .
leaflets containing western press accounts of the controversy were
being distributed to army units all over the country . soldiers and
peasants began wearing saffron patches the same color as a monk's robes
to indicate their support of the buddhists . in one division mess,
catholic and buddhist officers began eating apart, and at a military
training school, buddhist cadets demanded a chapel similar to the
catholic chapel . buddhist leaders said they would not agree to any
conciliation until the government made several concessions, and
accepted responsibility for the 13 buddhists' being shot down at a
religious demonstration in hue last may . but diem is still hopeful
that they will agree to some discussion and mediation . implied rebuke
. the president's apparent readiness to meet with the buddhists is
bitterly opposed by his sister-in-law, mme . ngo dinh nhu, who has
consistently urged that the buddhist opposition be crushed . " if the
president keeps bowing to the buddhists, " she said, " they will keep
right on taking advantage of this weakness to make new, impossible
demands . they are utterly hypocritical . " with what sounded like a
rebuke to mme . nhu, diem countered : " it is only because some have
contributed, either consciously or unconsciously, to raising doubts
about this government's policy that the solution to the buddhist affair
has been retarded . the policy of utmost conciliation is irreversible .
/ in washington, where henry cabot lodge was getting his final
briefings before leaving to take over as new u.s . ambassador in
saigon, secretary of state dean rusk declared himself " deeply
distressed " over the crisis and the detrimental effect it was having
on the war against the communist viet cong . said rusk : " we hope the
government out there will take a strong lead to bring about a greater
degree of peace and serenity . /
