the faith
that lights the fires the readiness of south viet nam's buddhist monks
and nuns to burn themselves to death as a means of protest against the
government both moves and repels the west . on the surface, it seems an
odd phenomenon in a religion generally regarded as passive, gentle and
full of reverence for life . the paradox is caused by the fact that
buddhism, though detached and otherworldly, can at times convulse
itself into action, and that its view of life as transitional can lead
to an almost indifferent embrace of death .self-immolation is not
merely a sit-in carried to oriental extremes . although it has not
occurred often and apparently never before in viet nam the practice is
deeply linked to the basic nature of buddhism, the world's fourth
largest religion . nirvana & dharma . buddhism consists of three
spiritual components, two traditions, and a multiplicity of sects . the
first of the three components, common to all buddhists, is the
legendary life of a handsome indian prince named gautama, who, about
600 years before christ, abandoned his luxurious existence after seeing
four facts of life for the first time : a sick man, an old man, a dead
man and a holy man . he fled to the forest to seek enlightenment, tried
and abandoned the ways of the hermit and the ascetic, and, after
meditating under a sacred bodhi tree for 49 days, at last achieved
buddhahood enlightenment, or nirvana . he spent the rest of his life
walking through india with his disciples, teaching until he died at 80,
leaving a final admonition : " work out your salvation with diligence
. " gautama's teaching, the second chief component of buddhism, is
summed up in the four noble truths : 1) man suffers all his life, and
goes on suffering from one life to the next ; 2) the origin of man's
suffering is craving for pleasure, for possessions, for cessation of
pain ; 3) the cure for craving is the practice of nonattachment to
everything even to the self ; 4) the way to nonattachment is the
eightfold path right views, right intentions, right speech, right
conduct, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
meditation . the buddha said nothing about god ; no divine judgment,
but an inexorable law of cause and effect called dharma determines
man's weal or woe . third essential component of buddhism is the vast
body of monks and nuns called the sangha . in addition to celibacy and
vegetarian nonviolence, monks practice poverty ; traditionally the
only possessions permitted are robes, a begging bowl for food, a
needle, prayer beads, a razor (to shave the head once a fortnight), and
a filter to remove bugs from the drinking water so as not to kill them
. greater & lesser vehicles . the two great buddhist traditions are
hinayana and mahayana . hinayana, the so-called lesser vehicle, is
generally more austere and uncompromising ; it holds that only monks
and nuns have hope of reaching nirvana . mahayana, the greater vehicle,
offers hope of enlightenment to laymen as well, and stresses the
compassionate concern of the buddha for humanity . the highest mahayana
ideal is the bodhisattva, or enlightened one, who sacrifices himself
for others, and mahayana mythology contains numerous examples of
sacrifices as an act of love as well as a means of liberation . zen
buddhism, one of the subdivisions of mahayana, imported by the japanese
from china, emphasizes a combination of prolonged meditation and shock
to achieve satori, or enlightenment .
viet nam's
buddhism, like china's and japan's, is predominantly mahayana, and the
suicide monks and nuns knew the numerous legends of bodhisattvas'
physical sacrifices, such as that of the holy man who gave his body to
a famished tigress to keep her from eating her cubs . some mahayana
monks still aid their liberation from the body by burning the fingers
off their left hands, and in the 6th century before gasoline monks who
decided to immolate themselves completely would eat waxy and fatty
foods for a couple of years so they would burn better . theoretically
buddhism does not permit suicide, and the word is carefully avoided in
favor of " sacrifice . " one of gautama's testaments, the lotus sutra,
as interpreted by monks in saigon, calls for all buddhists to sacrifice
themselves if their religion is in danger . one early buddhist martyr,
it is said, took his life by first punching his body full of holes and
sealing them with oil, then setting fire to himself . feasts & magic .
the grass-roots mahayana buddhism in the viet nam villages is a long
way from such grim practices . it usually takes the form of the
easygoing amidism, in which a paradise called " pure land " awaits the
intense faithful who repeats a simple prayer . it is strongly
influenced by the magical practices of corrupted taoism, imported from
china around the 7th century, and by confucianism, which stresses
ethical behavior . confucius emphasized family obligations, evident
still in viet nam's ancestor worship and cult of the dead . the 15th
day of the seventh month is set aside annually for the departed ; the
shades swoop down upon the living, who do their best to placate them
with a sumptuous feast . dressed in their best black silk and carrying
burning joss sticks, the women recite invitations to their dead
ancestors to partake of roast pig's head and sticks of sugar cane,
peanuts and white rice . as offerings to less trencher-minded spirits,
they burn paper imitations of currency and clothes . crusader & yogi .
in many western eyes, buddhism is socially useless . it has only a
limited tradition of good works ; the chief duty of monks and nuns is
contemplation . in the lotus and the robot, arthur koestler says of
oriental mysticism in general : " the mesianic arrogance of the
christian crusader is matched by the yogi's arrogant attitude of
detachment towards human suffering . " actually, buddhists are quite
capable of the crusading spirit . in ceylon during the 2nd century
b.c., a king led his army against indian invaders with a relic of
buddha in his spear . in viet nam and elsewhere, buddhists often took
an active part in fighting against colonial powers . during the korean
war, at least some buddhists were preaching that " to wipe out the
american imperialist demons is not only blameless but meritorious . "
ignoring the chinese communists' cruel persecution of buddhism in
tibet, some buddhists reason (as one scholar puts it) that when the
marxists' material needs are satisfied, they will " need something
spiritual above and beyond, " and that buddhism will be able to supply
it . it is this sort of self-delusion existing alongside buddhism's
nobility of spirit that makes the eightfold path so full of pitfalls .
