south viet nam the crackdown over and
over, the desperate voice shouted into the telephone : " they are
breaking into xa loi pagoda . they are breaking into xa loi pagoda . "
in the background, gunfire mingled with the confused screams of
buddhist monks and nuns and the clanging alarm of the huge brass gong
that hangs in the bell tower of saigon's largest pagoda . suddenly the
phone connection from the temple went dead . it was 12 : 20 a.m .
using their rifle butts as clubs, squads of tough, riottrained "
special forces " smashed into the pagoda, battering a path through a
small guard of young buddhist monks . the troopers had a list, and each
monk on the list was considered to be a " communist in disguise . " on
the temple's second floor, one monk tried to resist and was thrown
bodily from a balcony to the court-yard 20 ft . below . other monks and
nuns were routed from behind a flimsy barricade of wooden benches and
forced outside by tear gas and gunshots . sacking the pagoda's main
altar, the raiders carted away the charred heart of buddhist martyr
thich quang duc, who last june was the first of five buddhists to burn
himself to death in protest against the diem government's antibuddhist
drive . but the buddhists managed to spirit out of the building the
receptacle holding quang duc's ashes . " the ashes are holy, " said one
monk . " we would give 15 lives to defend them . " two other monks
escaped over the back wall of xa loi (pronounced sah loy) into the
grounds of the adjoining u.s . aid mission, where they were given
temporary sanctuary . to the diem government, the crackdown obviously
seemed necessary to protect the regime and enforce the law of the land
against buddhist defiance . but it was brutal, nonetheless, and it
aroused a strong new wave of sympathy for the buddhists . it also put
u.s . policy in south viet nam, which involves the lives and safety of
14,000 u.s . troops, into an agonizing dilemma . while often unhappy
with diem, the u.s . has proceeded on the assumption that it was safer
to stick with him than risk the chaos that might surround a switch to a
new, unknown and unpredictable regime . but by his move against the
buddhist monks, who have the growing support of the country's vast
buddhist majority, roman catholic diem may finally have shattered his
own political usefulness . he also opened up the possibilities of
coups, counter-coups, and even civil war from all of which only the
communist viet cong could benefit . boola, boola . until last week,
prodded by the u.s., diem had displayed an apparent willingness to
conciliate the buddhists . feeling betrayed by diem's crackdown, one
ranking u.s . embassy officer said : " all the time they've been
preaching conciliation to us, they've evidently been planning just the
opposite . " the buddhist crisis had begun as a religious one, but
gradually turned into a major political conflict . the buddhists are
far from passive martyrs . their religious and social demands a fairly
modest package demanding full equality with the country's roman
catholics had never sounded crucial, especially since even diem's worst
enemies could not point to any real anti-buddhist discrimination or
persecution . but when government troops stupidly killed 13 buddhists
in a demonstration in hue (pronounced whey) four months ago, the
buddhists made the clearly political demand that the government accept
/ responsibility " for the incident . since then, the buddhists have
developed into a serious opposition movement . pagodas, sporting
protest signs in vietnamese and english, became command posts where
duplicating machines ground out hundreds of thousands of messages, and
the sound of typewriters and telephones blended with the boom of temple
gongs . appeals for aid were broadcast to president kennedy, pope paul
vi, and u.n . secretary-general u thant . at a grisly, well-organized
press conference in saigon, buddhist leaders introduced a tiny,
withered buddhist nun as a candidate for self-immolation in protest
against the diem government . when one buddhist spokesman who had
studied at yale wanted to pass out the latest communiques from the
pagoda, he would stroll up to a yale-educated u.s . newsman and say :
/ boola, boola . /
in the early phases of the quarrel, diem
probably could and should have conciliated the buddhists . but he
vacillated . his brother and sister-in-law, ngo dinh nhu and mme . nhu,
insisted that unless the buddhists were crushed, there would be a coup
threatening the very existence of the family's rule . mme . nhu's fiery
philippics lent impetus to the buddhist movement just as it appeared to
be flagging . by last week, after three buddhist suicides spurred new
protest demonstrations throughout the country, it was clearly too late
for conciliation . even if diem had wanted it, the buddhist leaders
themselves no longer wanted it ; they were plainly determined to press
their advantage . and so the government evidently yielded to nhu's
get-tough policy . rope trick . the crackdown in saigon was duplicated
all over south viet nam, and more than 1,000 people were imprisoned .
in the buddhist stronghold of hue, the approach of government troops
was signaled by the beating of temple drums and the clashing of cymbals
calling for help . beating pots and pans to rouse their neighbors, the
angry populace poured from homes and raced to defend the city's temples
. at tu dam pagoda, monks tried to turn the coffin of a priest who had
burned himself alive in the buddhist suicide protest wave . but
government soldiers, firing m1 rifles as they advanced, overran the
temple, snatched the smoldering coffin away, and smashed a statue of
gautama buddha . from the temple's treasury they took an estimated
$30,000 and left the pagoda a gutted ruin . near hue's dieu de pagoda,
the government forces met their first determined resistance . as troops
tried to stretch a barbed-wire barricade across the bridge leading to
the temple, a mob tore it down with bare hands . with fists, rocks and
sharpened sticks, the crowd fought the heavily armed troops for the
bridge . tear-gas grenades thrown by the soldiers were caught and
thrown right back at them . when troops tried to clear a way through
the bridge defenders with their rifle butts, the crowd tore the weapons
from their hands and jabbed the soldiers in the groin . after a
five-hour pitched battle, the government finally won control of the
bridge at daybreak by driving armored cars through the screaming,
spitting, swearing mob . the defense of the bridge and the temple cost
the townspeople an estimated 30 dead and 200 wounded . ten truckloads
of bridge defenders were carted away to jail, many streaming blood, and
an estimated 500 people were arrested throughout the city, including 17
of the 47 hue university professors who had resigned earlier in the
week in protest against the firing of the school's rector, a catholic
priest and an opponent of diem's brother, archbishop ngo dinh thuc .
though a 24-hour curfew was clamped on hue, the city's residents were
still defiant . one buddhist monk fled through the streets hotly
pursued by three government troopers . the priest raced down an alley
at whose entrance sat an aged vietnamese woman . as the soldiers turned
into the alley, the woman pulled tightly on a rope stretched across the
street, bringing all three soldiers tumbling down . then she scuttled
away to safety . article 44 . at 6 a.m., radio saigon crackled to life
and president diem came on the air . " under article 44 of the
constitution, " he said, " i declare a state of siege throughout the
national territory . i confer upon the army of the republic of viet nam
the responsibility to restore security and public order so that the
state may be protected, communism defeated, freedom secured, and
democracy achieved . " under the martial law proclamation, the army was
given blanket search-and-arrest powers and empowered to forbid all
public gatherings, restrict press freedom, and prohibit the circulation
of all " printed material and other documents harmful to public order
and security . " in saigon the army imposed a tight 9 p.m.-to-5 a.m .
curfew . carrying automatic weapons and rifles with fixed bayonets,
troops in full camouflage battle dress guarded every major bridge and
intersection . tight censorship was clamped on all outgoing news, and
reporters were forced to give their stories to travelers flying to
neighboring countries or to fly out themselves with their copy .
telephone service in the homes and offices of all u.s . military and
embassy personnel was cut off .
the political
repercussions began at once . protesting the government's action,
foreign minister vu van mau quit his post, shaved his head and
announced that he would go to india to become a contemplative buddhist
monk . south viet nam's ambassador to washington, tran van chuong, who
is mme . nhu's father, also quit, with a sharp denunciation of his
daughter's policies and of the diem government for " copying the
tactics of totalitarian regimes . " as long as diem stays in power, he
added, there is " not one chance of winning the war against the
communists .
in saigon more than 500
university of saigon medical students boycotted classes and held
turbulent anti-government meetings . when a professor tried to rip down
a pro-buddhist poster, he was stoned by students . throughout the city,
martial law posters were surreptitiously defaced or torn away .
students jeered at soldiers patrolling the streets : " why don't you
go back to fighting the viet cong ? " the government retaliated
against student unrest by closing all saigon's schools . the ugly
american . the crackdown in south viet nam caused consternation in
washington . in a blunt condemnation the state department said that
saigon's strong-arm tactics represented " a direct violation by the
vietnamese government of assurances that it was pursuing a policy of
reconciliation toward the buddhists . the u.s . deplores repressive
actions of this nature . " the move against the buddhists was obviously
timed to be over and done with before u.s . ambassador henry cabot
lodge arrived in saigon . when it happened, lodge was in japan . on the
way out from san francisco by commercial jet, he had found himself
across the aisle from novelist eugene burdick, co-author of the ugly
american, and that self-appointed expert on u.s . errors in the far
east offered the ambassador a half-hour briefing, to which lodge
listened diplomatically . the gist : don't rely on embassy officers,
consult seasoned newsmen, beware of communications blocks in the
embassy, get fighter cover for those combat helicopters . on orders
from president kennedy, lodge cut short his stay in japan, and by
hastily commandeered u.s . air force dc-6 proceeded at once to saigon,
where he was met by a vietnamese protocol officer, embassy officials
and general paul harkins, commander of the u.s . troops in south viet
nam . as if to dramatize u.s . disapproval of the government action,
lodge went to the u.s . aid mission building to talk to the two monks
who had been given sanctuary . ignoring demands that the monks be
turned over to vietnamese authorities, lodge ordered the u.s . staff to
get some vegetables for the vegetarian priests . anti, anti, anti .
what to do next was a question thickly clouded for both lodge and
washington by confusion over precisely who was in control of the
situation in south viet nam . diem still seemed in complete charge and
in a cable to the new york herald tribune's marguerite higgins he
declared, " i trust in the army and in fact i maintain control over the
situation . " but it looked increasingly likely that the key figure
behind the government's move had been brother nhu, head of the
10,000-strong special forces and secret police . for weeks there had
been hints that he might try a coup of his own supposedly to forestall
the anti-diem coup that he kept predicting unless the buddhists were put
down . any change in government policy, he had warned, would be "
anti-buddhist, anti-american, anti-weakness . /
the crackdown it was nhu's
special forces that sacked the pagodas ; regular army troops were only
called in after the job was done to help keep order . theoretically,
under the martial law proclamation, it is now the army that runs the
country, and, again theoretically, diem placed top authority in major
general tran van don, 46, a highly respected, onetime corps commander
who has had great military success against the viet cong . but don may
merely be a figurehead hostile to the government, he was pulled out of
his field command last december and kicked upstairs to a staff job,
where he would have no troops at his disposal in case the thought of a
coup ever crossed his mind . diem and nhu evidently intended to vest
real military power in another, very different officer, whose loyalty
the ngo family can count on, colonel le quant tung, commander under nhu
of the special forces . a devout catholic, tung comes from central viet
nam, birthplace of the ngo family, apparently has no political
ambitions, and was once a top official in nhu's secret organization,
the can lao party . as long as a month ago, large units of special
forces were moved into saigon under colonel tung's command . the big
question is whether tung can keep control and whether the regular army
will go along or will turn against the regime . the course of events .
after nine years of absolute power, the ngo family had taken a
considerable risk in letting so much authority slip from its hands
under the martial law proclamation . taking over the functioning of all
government ministries, the army for the first time has a viable power
structure of its own . it may well stay loyal as long as diem remains
in the presidential palace, but nhu is vastly unpopular with most of
the military commanders except tung . the army immediately tried to
dissociate itself from the buddhist crackdown . all official bulletins
from the army-controlled government information center pointedly
mentioned that nhu's special forces, and not the army, had wrecked the
pagodas . but having discovered that an opportunity for power now
exists outside the ngo family, various military factions may well begin
to jockey for sole authority . at week's end, according to one report,
this fear was realized at the small town of my tho, just south of
saigon, where buddhist and catholic troops turned on each other . in
the field, action against the viet cong has come to a virtual
standstill . " this wrecks the army's efforts against the reds, " said
a senior u.s . intelligence officer . " they're too busy enforcing
curfews to fight . how the reds must be loving this . " more than ever,
diem's government or any other in south viet nam depends on u.s .
backing . yet even if washington should officially decide that diem has
become a liability in the fight against the viet cong, the u.s . will
not support a change in government while the powers in saigon are still
settling accounts among themselves . said one washington official : "
when the rumbling of opposition starts within a regime of this sort,
you can't  tell where events are going to take it . /
