burma the way to socialism & havoc while the
world's attention was focused on south viet nam, another southeast
asian nation was quietly going from bad to disastrous . burma's
business is virtually at a standstill, credit is nonexistent, foreign
investment has vanished all because dictator ne win insists on instant,
total socialism . burma has 1,370 miles of mountainous border with red
china, and, says an eastern european diplomat, " practicing socialism
in such proximity to communism is like walking a tightrope in a typhoon
. " in foreign affairs, ne win has not yet been blown off the
tightrope, has managed to maintain what passes for neutrality : mildy
hostile toward the u.s., friendly toward china (without, however,
endorsing peking's attack against india), friendlier toward moscow and,
of course, accepting aid from all three . but domestically, the typhoon
is causing havoc . nationalization . energetic dictator ne win, who is
part-chinese, in 1958 pressured parliament into making him premier in
place of dreamy, inefficient but popular u nu . after ruling for 17
months, ne win permitted national elections . u nu won an easy victory
and proved even more ineffectual than before . in march 1962, ne win
jailed u nu and most of his cabinet, abolished parliament, imposed
censorship, and began to rule through a 17-man revolutionary council of
army officers . leaving nothing to chance, ne win named himself leader
of the council, president of burma, minister for defense, finance and
revenue, and chief of the military tribunals that have replaced burma's
graft-ridden judiciary . devout buddhist u nu is still under house
arrest and passes the time in meditation and, presumably, in pursuit of
his special obsession astrology . ne win also produced a vague document
called " the burmese way to socialism " and nationalized industry,
collectivized agriculture, and took complete control of foreign trade .
one saturday afternoon, he grabbed the nation's 24 foreign and domestic
banks . britain's prestigious lloyd's bank was renamed people's bank no
. 19, and the same fate befell two red chinese banks, putting a crimp
in rangoon's communist propaganda machine . industrial production has
fallen 40 per cent in three months and urban unemployment has soared .
the few remaining private companies are clamoring for nationalization,
hoping to get a better break on raw material allocations and some
protection against strikes . because there are too few trained
administrators to run any more enterprises, ne win last week was forced
to refuse all future nationalization petitions . although in the past
the government encouraged workers to strike against private employers
in state-run businesses, strikes are considered unpatriotic ne win last
week urged labor to moderate its wage demands, in a belated attempt to
pacify businessmen . insurrection . while crippling the economy, ne win
has been striving for a measure of national unity . his fairly
competent army of 50,000 men controls the main cities and about 50 per
cent of the texas-sized nation . about 35 per cent of the area is no
man's land, and the remaining 15 per cent is divided among a variety of
insurgents, ranging from tribal groups, such as the shans, karens and
kachins, to two major bands of communist insurgents, 1) the trotskyite
red flag movement, and 2) the larger white flag communists, who are
fragmented into stalinist and revisionist wings . still another
insurgent outfit is composed of several hundred chinese nationalist
soldiers who fled their homeland years ago and have since operated as
bandits .
in vain, previous burmese governments
have offered amnesties to the rebels . ne win went farther : he
promised a safe-conduct to rebel leaders for discussions in rangoon .
red flag leader thakin soe accepted . he was picked up by a river
gunboat, taken to a government airfield and flown to rangoon, where he
promptly demanded 1) a nationwide cease-fire, 2) withdrawal of burmese
troops from vital red flag areas, and 3) a meeting of all political
factions legal and illegal to form a new government . taken aback by
these demands, ne win denounced thakin soe as " insincere " and gave
him seven days' immunity to get back to the safety of his jungle
hideouts . opposition . though ne win is conceded to be honest and
hard-working, easygoing burmese long for the good old good-for-nothing
government of u nu, whose photo is still hawked on the streets and
outsells that of ne win by a wide margin . one opposition leader, u ba
swe, called on ne win " to retreat from the brink of disaster for the
sake of the nation, " and the ex-ambassador to the u.s., u win,
demanded
a return to parliamentary democracy . both were packed off to "
protective custody, " along with nine other dissenters from instant
socialism . nervous ne win frequently carries a pistol, and
anti-aircraft guns stand ready at government house . yet, even though
opposition to his regime is massive throughout the country, he still
has the bulk of the army with him . and, as is his habit when he
encounters obstacles, ne win changed course slightly . he temporarily
rescinded controls on rice to placate farmers, offered to build a new
student union at the university of rangoon (he had blown up the old one
after a student riot in july 1962), and called a conference of his
administrators to " improve and review " all measures enacted by the
government . presumably to show he is not a total tyrant, ne win
released three former cabinet ministers (but not ex-premier u nu) from
house arrest . unless the army stages a coup, ne win may muddle along
indefinitely . " it's not the burmese way to man the barricades, "
explained a rangoon educator . " given our plentiful food supplies and
the passivity of the people, it's possible for someone to misrule burma
for perhaps a decade before incurring true wrath . /
