india the case of nehru's dog in india, cried a
socialist politician last week, 270 million people exist on 4 #$ a day,
while it takes 63 #$ daily to feed jawaharlal nehru's dog . not so,
retorted nehru : daily subsistence for 70 per cent of the population
is all of 20 #$ . (he did not deny his canine food costs.) the
accusation, and the prime minister's reply, were fair samples of the
acrimonious personal attack on nehru
last week during the first censure motion against the government in
india's 16 years of independence . with a 229-seat plurality, nehru's
congress party was in no danger . nevertheless, the debate, which
followed three shattering by-election defeats for the government,
vented indians' wide and rising dissatisfaction with the congress party
policies that led to the nation's humiliating defeats by the chinese
last october . the attack on the government was led by j . b .
kripalani, longtime friend of nehru and onetime president of his
congress party, who was elected to parliament recently as an
independent . whole skins . " this government has failed in its
domestic
policy, " declared kripalani . it " has failed in its foreign policy,
and it has failed in its economic policy . the people feel depressed
and frustrated, and believe the country has slid back during the past
15 years . " the government's longtime policy of " nonalignment, "
kripalani argued, no longer fits " national needs . " said he : " you
cannot coexist with someone who does not believe in coexistence . we
are at war with china . " the government's case was not notably helped
by krishna menon, who, in his first major speech in parliament since he
was sacked as defense minister last winter, made the curiously
unguarded
admission that the government's nonalignment policy was based,
not on principle, but merely on " our desire to keep our skins whole
and entire . " the communists, who refused to associate themselves with
the no-confidence motion but made the most of it anyway, bitterly
condemned the airtraining exercises that are to be held jointly with
the u.s . and britain in india, probably in november . the communists
aso baited food minister s . k . patil for his " annual pilgrimage to
america to beg for more food . " retorted patil : " moscow is a
delightful city . i wish i could go there all the time . but there are
no surpluses of food in russia . " departing ministers . nehru's
rebuttal was a rambling, schoolmasterly homily on india's " vision of
the future " and the need for hard work ; while he spoke, at least two
members of his party slumbered in their seats . the censure motion was
defeated 346-61, with the communists abstaining . the heat of the
attack on the once-sacrosanct nehru dismayed many congress party
officials, and led to the resignation of six cabinet ministers, who
announced that they would concentrate on rejuvenating the party . the
departing ministers were the strongest men on nehru's team, although
some were in political trouble . among them were two strong
pro-westerners, food minister patil and finance minister morarji desai,
widely criticized for food shortages and high prices, as well as home
minister lal bahadur shastri, nehru's likeliest successor . nehru's
daughter, indira gandhi, who is herself a potential candidate to
succeed nehru, insisted that india's mood of unrest is a sign of "
progress . " impatiently tapping a pink-toed, sandaled foot, mrs .
gandhi explained : " when your children reach their teens, they
suddenly feel their parents are all wrong . india is in that stage now,
for it's just 16 years old . everybody grumbles about taxes . but you
can see the number of shops increasing, more people going to the
cinema, more people going on holidays . why, the mountain resorts are
so
chock-full that you can't find a bed anywhere ! /
