communists a fan of henry ford's from his
own crimean
estate with its now-famed badminton court and glass-enclosed swimming
pool, nikita khrushchev last week traveled to marshal tito's wonderland
in yugoslavia . from a state dinner at belgrade's white palace,
khrushchev went on an adriatic cruise aboard tito's yacht galeb
(seagull), spent three days at tito's island retreat of brioni, then to
tito's 400-year-old castle in the dinaric alps, next to tito's summer
residence at brda and, finally, to tito's croatian hunting lodge at
belje . to the chinese, who have long complained that khrushchev has
gone over to the enemy camp both ideologically and in his personal
tastes, all this must have seemed infuriating particularly since host
tito is their ideological archenemy, the " revisionist " who first
broke with stalin and established a more or less independent brand of
marxism . at the height of his quarrel with peking, and with a certain
unrest among the soviet satellites, khrushchev was clearly drawing
closer to tito, even hinted that yugoslavia might be allowed to
participate in comecon, the creaky eastern common market . tito in turn
seemed determined to suggest that, even if moscow accepts him
wholeheartedly as a comrade, he retain his independence ; in doing so
he presumably had an eye on washington, where congress this week
considers whether to restore the previously canceled
most-favored-nation
rating for yugoslav exports to the u.s . cracked a yugoslav official :
/ we didn't sign a treaty with khrushchev as you americans did . we
didn't even play badminton with him . " mama's children . the two
leaders did just about everything else, as they ranged the country from
quake-shattered skoplje to wild montenegro, where after a picnic the
mountainfolk broke into the kolo, a fiery, footstamping circle dance .
khrushchev and his stolid wife nina, and tito and his statuesque spouse
jovanka, broke into the ring, locking arms and swirling around with the
pretty girls and peasants . the most instructive part of the visit came
at the rakovica auto plant outside belgrade . in a discussion with the
workers, khrushchev seemed fascinated by the yugoslav factory system of
decentralized, locally administered socialism through workers' councils
elected by the employees and empowered to fire or reverse the decisions
of the plant manager . the system has long been denounced by red
chinese ideologues, and by russia since yugoslavia was kicked out of
the comintern in 1948 . even khrushchev once sneered, " the workers'
councils are only good when they are propped up by american grain and
meat . " reversing himself, khrushchev called the councils a /
progressive development " and said russia was facing the question of "
whether or not conditions are ripe for the democratization of
management . unless there is a force of public opinion our managers
tend to become autocrats . of course, your system may not be totally in
line with the leninist principle of unified leadership . don't you ever
have trouble between workers and directors ? " assured that
disagreements were always worked out, khrushchev shook his head
skeptically and said, " you're a little boastful but, of course, mama
always says her children are the most beautiful . you've got your
shortcomings but then so do we . " plaster bust . warming up,
khrushchev demanded : " what is the most important problem now ? it
is to beat capitalism . the one who creates the most through mass
production will win . henry ford has shown us how to do it . " he
added, " after the revolution, we sent a delegation to henry ford and
asked him to help us build a factory that would produce 30,000 cars a
year . ford told us that a factory making only 30,000 would not work .
the car would be too expensive . he said we should come back when we
were ready to produce 120,000 a year . " to illustrate the lessons of
productivity, khrushchev even rambled off into biblical history,
inaccurately recalling that christ had fed 40,000 persons with a single
loaf of bread . with his usual heavy-footed humor he added, " but no
one knows if all got enough to eat . if they had, they would not have
left palestine . " as for the chinese : " they say that their country
has to rely on its own resources . it is true and it is not true . if
you lock yourself within your own frontiers, you lose your economic
potential . they say they are going to rely on their own resources, and
then they write to us for credits . " the entranced workers at rakovica
responded to all this by handing khrushchev a present he must have long
wanted and needed : a plaster bust of lenin . presumably none of henry
ford was available .
