togo death at the gate for sylvanus olympio, 60, president of
togo, the nightmare began shortly after midnight . disturbed by strange
sounds in his comfortable house in the capital city of lome, olympio
grabbed a pistol and went to the head of the stairs . there, to his
consternation, was a crowd of mutinous soldiers crowding the floor
below . barefoot, clad in shorts and sport shirt, olympio leaped
through a window onto the soft, sandy earth of his garden . he made it
to the u.s . embassy compound next door . in the graveled courtyard,
olympio found a parked plymouth sedan belonging to the embassy, and
crawled in . there, in the early morning sunlight, he was spotted
huddled beneath the steering wheel by one of the mutineers . crying "
all right, you have me .! " , olympio surrendered and, prodded by
rifle butts, was hustled down the driveway, past a mango tree and
through the green gate . there he balked . sergeant etienne eyadema,
commander of the rebel detachment, later declared : " he could not
stay there . there would have been demonstrations . he would not move .
i shot him . " at 7 that morning, u.s . ambassador leon poullada drove
up to the embassy building, found president olympio lying in a pool of
blood just outside the compound . there were red finger smears on the
gate, as if he had struggled to rise . as embassy aides carried the
corpse into the courtyard, fat lizards scuttled away across the gravel
and lounging togolese soldiers watched silently from a nearby street
corner . " blow to progress . " thus last week died the man who was
ruler of a postagestamp-sized republic (75 by 340 miles) on the
sweltering west african coast . chief architect of togo's 1960
independence from french control, london-educated olympio practiced
stern austerity at home, rejected demagoguery and sided openly with the
west . president kennedy, whom olympio visited in washington last
march, mourned his death as " a blow to the progress of stable
government in africa . " suspicion immediately focused on ghana's
strongman kwame nkrumah, who has conducted a bitter feud with olympio
over control of the powerful, 700,000member ewe (pronounced ev-vy)
tribe, which was split between both countries by european
boundary-setters . twice before, assassins had tried to kill olympio ;
each time ghana's agents were accused . but this time it was olympio's
own zealous economies that brought disaster . " bon . ca va . " as part
of his economic austerity program, olympio had stubbornly refused to
expand togo's flyspeck army beyond its standing strength of 250 men
exactly one company . this angered both the " army " and the
demobilized, hardeyed togolese veterans of french colonial wars, who
had fought from indo-china to algeria but could find no place in their
homeland's armed forces . recently, a tough ex-sergeant, emmanuel
bodjolle, 35, jobless and with a family to support, organized a
conspiracy with 30 other noncoms . last week, after olympio tore up a
final plea to take into the service at least 60 of the most qualified
veterans, bodjolle snapped : " bon . ca va . " that midnight his
battle-tough insurgents struck, easily occupying the capital .
olympio's successor is nicolas grunitzky, 49, his brother-in-law, who
was swept out of office as territorial premier for the french when
olympio took over five years ago . grunitzky's first act was to
announce that togo would align itself with the afro-malagasy union, the
pro-french association of west africa states . then he declared free
elections would soon follow . but, as so often happens in such
circumstances, he decided it would be best to dissolve parliament and
rule alone until things settled down .
