stalinsville on the styx private vasily terkin was the eternal sad
sacha, and his fictional military exploits poked sly fun at soviet
officerdom throughout world war ii . russians complained mightily when
his creator, poet aleksandr trifonovich tvardovsky, failed to bring him
home from the wars . last week, to their delight, vasily was back with
a difference . the soldier's return was chronicled in a subtle, stylish
new poem by tvardovsky that was spread across two pages of izvestia
under a warmly approving introduction by editor aleksei adzhubei,
khrushchev's son-in-law . in stalin's day, for all his buffoonery,
terkin ultimately had to symbolize " the ideal soviet soldier " ; in
his latest adventure, he is a cockily irreverent figure who gets killed
in battle and goes to a " nether world " that turns out to be a sort of
stalinsville on the styx . hell, terkin finds, is like the moscow
subway, " only lower . " it is run by a pampered army of bureaucrats,
who spend their days playing dominoes and yelling at the inmates to
keep out of their way . a model of communist planning, the nether world
has menus but no food, steam baths without steam, hotels without beds .
there is even a magazine editor who " sweats all over " as he " puts in
quotes and takes them out again and reads each page from top to bottom
and from bottom to top . " says one big brotherly ghost : " you don't
have to talk, you don't have to think at all . " terkin finally manages
to escape and wakes up in a hospital on earth, where doctors
confidently predict that he will live to be 100 . the moral of terkin's
trip, tvardovsky suggests, is that all russians share the blame for
stalin because they resigned themselves to his excesses instead of
resisting them . however, the poet also urges russians to stop harping
on stalinism, which has been khrushchev's line of late . terkin's
resurrection was a sign that khrushchev had decided to soften a
campaign against controversial writing that has been going on since
december . in fact, editor adzhubei noted
reassuringly, nikita liked the poem and laughed loudly when it was read
to him before publication .
