south africa escape artists while radios blared the descriptions
of the fugitives, thousands of south african police manned roadblocks,
searched white homes and black townships all over the country . their
elusive quarry, honored by the biggest reward ($5,600) ever posted in
south africa : four prisoners who had staged a 1 a.m . walk-away from
johannesburg's central police headquarters . the leader of the
fugitives was arthur goldreich, at 33 one of the country's most
successful artists, and as of last week one of its more successful
escape artists as well . raid on rivonia . bespectacled and slightly
stooped, with a black beard (when last seen), goldreich won south
africa's 1955 best young painter award for his figures in black and
white, designed sets and costumes for king kong, the famed south
african musical . to prime minister hendrik verwoerd's regime, he was a
key suspect in the clandestine operations of the anti-apartheid
underground . last month police descended on the artist's swank home in
the johannesburg suburb of rivonia, arrested goldreich, his wife hazel,
four other white men, and a dozen nonwhites .
like goldreich, the other
arrested whites were also prominent in south africa's intellectual
community : lawyer robert hepple ; dr . hilliard festenstein, a noted
medical researcher ; engineer dennis goldberg ; architect lionel
bernstein . among the nonwhites seized was walter sisulu, one-time
secretary-general of the banned african national congress and one of
the country's most wanted men . goldreich was jailed under a recent law
by which police can hold a suspect for 90 days without charge . (when
the 90-day term comes to an end, some prisoners are being dutifully
released, allowed to walk 100 yards, then rearrested for another
three-month stretch.) a month after his arrest, goldreich apparently
got hold of cellblock keys, possibly with inside help, and freed three
fellow prisoners two anti-apartheid asians, and a jewish lawyer, harold
wolpe, longtime defender of imprisoned leftists.
dark mutterings . the
case called attention to the fact that among south african whites who
oppose verwoerd's apartheid, perhaps the most zealous are jews . the
bulk of south africa's 116,000 jews tacitly condone apartheid, the
jewish board of deputies has always been careful not to attack it, and
some of the wealthiest jews contribute to verwoerd's national party .
but to thousands of others, especially the younger, university-educated
group, apartheid smells too much like nazism . in the 1961 general
election, jews voted massively against the national party, and the lone
anti-apartheid crusader in the 160-member assembly today is the pert,
irrespressible jewish wife of a johannesburg physician, mrs . helen
suzman . despite such opposition and verwoerd's own pro-nazi past, jews
have so far been unmolested by the regime . the goldreich escape,
however, touched off ominous rumblings . last week when criminal
investigation chief reinier j . van den bergh mentioned the rivonia
raid in a speech, a voice from the audience cried : " jews ! " van
den bergh allowed that foes of apartheid might be " instruments of jews
another fugitive
colored physician kenneth abrahams, who had escaped sabotage charges by
slipping across the border to bechuanaland, found himself back in south
africa under arrest . abrahams' lawyers charged last week that he had
been kidnaped by south african police on british-administered soil .
