norway end of an
institution interrupted only by the nazi occupation, norway's labor
party had been in power for 28 years, longer than any other democratic
party in europe . last week it was out . at the root of its downfall
was a long-developing schism between the party's moderate, pro-west
majority and its far-left fringe, which demands norway's withdrawal
from nato.two years ago, some leftist laborites bolted, formed a
splinter " socialist people's party, " and managed to win two
parliamentary seats on the 1961 election . partly as a result of the
defection, premier einar gerhardsen's government lost its majority in
the storting (parliament), found itself deadlocked, 74 seats to 74
seats, with the opposition coalition . the balance of power was held by
two splinter leftists . reluctantly, gerhardsen accepted their support
to stay in office . what broke up the uneasy coalition and brought on
norway's first government crisis in a generation was a tragic scandal
in the state-run coal mines . in recent years, four disastrous
explosions and several lesser accidents have plagued the mines, at a
cost of 74 lives . several weeks ago, an investigating commission
charged official negligence . last week, after four days of angry
debate, the two splinter socialists joined with the opposition in a
no-confidence vote against the government . one of the leftists, finn
gustavsen, explained that the s.p.p . toppled gerhardsen because " he
has no longer any contact with the working class . " there was spite
involved, too ; gerhardsen recently appointed that old communist
target, ex-u.n . secretary-general trygve lie, a staunch laborite, to
the post of minister of industry . as the unchallenged leader of his
party for two decades, gerhardsen, 66, had become a national
institution, was so scrupulous that he insisted on buying his own
postage stamps for personal letters . he ran a part-free, largely
controlled economy, was staunchly pro-west and led norway into nato .
his successor was expected to be blond, husky conservative floor leader
john lyng, 58, attorney and brilliant prosecutor of norway's nazi war
criminals . conservative lyng's four-party coalition consists chiefly
of farmers, merchants and industrialists, whose economic views are less
statist than the laborites' ; but lyng will hardly try to alter
norway's deeply ingrained welfare society and certainly not its nato
policies . with the two maverick leftists still holding the balance of
power, he knows that he will be lucky to survive until the next
election in 1965 .
