great britain bobbies in trouble when constabulary
duty's to be done, the policeman's lot is not a happy one . the pirates
of penzance to the u.s . tourist driving on the right but wrong side of
the road, or hopelessly demanding a drink at midnight, the london
police seem paragons of patience . whether breaking up a race riot or
gingerly plucking anti-nuclear squatters from the pavement, the brawny,
pink-cheeked bobby almost never resorts to the panicky brutality of the
french flic or the officious zeal of the german polizist . britain's
police, armed only with a night stick, still believe in pounding a beat
. its streets and parks after dark are among the world's safest ; and
while an english householder is away on vacation, likely as not the
bobbies will keep an eye on his front door . but in recent years, and
particularly since the profumo-keeler-ward scandals, britons have come
to suspect that their police are not only markedly less proficient at
keeping the queen's peace than of old, but may also have become less
scrupulous in upholding the traditionally high standards of british
justice . smarter crooks . when it comes to solving crime, it is still
elementary to call in scotland yard . last week, led by such wise old
bluebottles as commander george hatherill, 65, the yard's dean of
sleuths, who speaks eight languages and has solved 17 murders, yard men
investigating the great buckinghamshire train robbery succeeded in
rounding up nine suspects, recovered $761,367 of the $7,000,000 loot .
also on hand were ernest millen, boss of the flying squad, alias the
heavy mob, whose 100-odd sleuths know more about the underworld than
dante ; and the terrible twins, top detectives tom butler and peter
vibart, who have cracked many a big case together . yet so far at
least, the gang's ringleaders were still at large . even without such
humiliations at the hands of master crooks, the lot of britain's 76,530
policemen is an increasingly unhappy one . the nation's police forces
are critically undermanned (authorized strength : 82,313), sadly
underpaid (sergeant's pay averages $3,000 a year) and, in many critics'
eyes, undereducated . in recent years, police recruits have included
not a single university graduate ; only about 10 per call new bobbies
have the equivalent of a high school diploma . british criminals, by
contrast, are becoming more imaginative and technically proficient
every year . as for scotland yard, even its staunchest admirers admit
that the legend tends to overshadow performance . of a record number of
crimes reported in london last year, fewer than 25 per cent were solved
; police have recovered none of the 700,000 stolen in four major
robberies from one bank during the past three years .
in the woodshed . as for the profumo
case, though an official inquiry into its security aspects is nearly
complete, the government has given little assurance that it will lessen
what the economist recently called " the already cumbrous weight of
suspicion that there is something nasty in the woodshed . " last week
the labor party's " shadow " foreign secretary, patrick gordon walker,
called for a royal commission to investigate the roles played
throughout by the government, judiciary and police . among other hints
of nastiness in the woodshed, or the police station, britons were
perturbed by recent charges that scotland yard had browbeaten a
convicted prostitute into testifying against ward (she later recanted),
and by speculation that police deliberately failed to produce a defense
witness at the trial of " lucky " gordon, the jamaican singer who was
imprisoned on charges of beating christine keeler, and later
mysteriously freed . since there is no watertight separation of
executive, judicial and legislative powers in britain's unwritten
constitution, the disquieting implication to many britons was that, in
its embarrassment over the profumo scandal, the government had exerted
extraordinary pressure to put ward behind bars . if such suspicions are
unfair, there was little likelihood that they would ever be fully
investigated, let alone refuted . danger to democracy .e many other
legacies of 19th century britain, the law enforcement system seems
almost to have been designed not to work . to some extent, it was . sir
robert peel, who in 1829 organized the first modern force (and gave the
bobbies his name), admitted to grave misgivings that it might be used
as an instrument of tyranny . unlike a soldier or civil servant, the
british policeman is not a " servant of the crown " but has the
ambiguous legal status of a uniformed civilian who is merely paid to do
what every citizen should do on his own . even to this day, many
britons believe that a strong, unified police force could lead to a
police state . as a result, they have 158 separate local forces whose
chief constables are accountable only to themselves . when a royal
commission in 1962 recommended continuation of this system, commission
member a . l . goodhart an eminent u.s . jurist who was then master of
oxford's university college objected that a single, centrally
controlled police network would be infinitely more efficient, and more
democratic, than the " empty velvet glove " with which britain is now
trying to defeat organized crime . " the danger in a democracy, " said
he, " does not lie in a central police that is too strong but in local
police forces that are too weak . " in day-to-day police work, the lack
of liaison between forces more than 50 per cent have fewer than 350 men
inevitably helps the criminal . another boon to careful crooks : a law
by which police are only allowed to file fingerprints of convicted
criminals, not of suspects . buckinghamshire's chief constable,
brigadier john cheny cheney (eton, sandhurst, india), did not even
enlist scotland yard's help in the train robbery until nearly a day
later . what worries many experts is that such built-in inefficiency
can only cost britain's bobbies what remains of their old prestige . as
it is, they are fighting the greatest crime wave in the nation's
history with insufficient manpower and inadequate coordination, amid
deepening public distrust that suggests their lot will be unhappier yet
the lord high chancellor, a
cabinet member who earns $5,600 a year more than the prime minister,
serves simultaneously as the government's chief legal adviser, the
nation's senior judge, titular head of the legal profession and speaker
of the house of lords .
