south viet nam coping with capricorn in business, count the
costs before you act . the moon now in capricorn suggests keeping
practical values in mind . tomorrow is rather too energetic for
comfort, but that may be because everybody is on the move . a late
august horoscope syndicated horoscopes, many of them from abroad, are
popular features in many south vietnamese newspapers, but last week the
government banned them, presumably on the theory that
some star-minded dissident might be moved to try a coup on an
astrologically auspicious day . in south viet nam everybody was indeed
on the move, but where they were moving was no clearer than the zodiac
. the u.s . was increasingly unhappy with president ngo dinh diem
(capricorn), and after what the u.s . officially called his " brutal "
crackdown on the buddhists, washington obviously could not string along
with him as if nothing had happened . so the u.s . made noises designed
to encourage opposition to diem . but south viet nam being what it is,
potential rebels did not want to move without virtually a written
contract for u.s . support . meanwhile the u.s . tried to place the
odium of the crackdown on diem's brother, ngo dinh nhu (libra), and
new ambassador henry cabot lodge (cancer) managed to suggest, without
saying anything publicly, that he did not like what was going on . the
siege . a week after the government's crackdown, saigon looked like a
city under siege . heavily armed special forces units guarded all key
installations . mobile " anti-suicide ? ' squads
patrolled the streets, ready to douse any further buddhist attempts at
self-immolation . and anti-aircraft battery was rolled into position
outside saigon's presidential palace ; since the communist viet cong
have no planes, the government evidently feared an attack from its own
force . having jailed most buddhist leaders, the regime moved to
silence other vocal opposition saigon's seething student population .
in the city's crowded marketplace and near saigon university,
rifle-toting combat police in camouflage uniforms arrested all youths
of high school and college age in sight and
mme . nhu does not reveal the day or month
of her birth, but there is speculation that she may be aries ( " very
important to
win the test of wills " ) or leo ( " if
crossed, roars like a lion, lacks understanding of what is in the minds
of others " ) . hauled them off to detention
camps on the outskirts . throughout the city, blue-uniformed members of
nhu's republican youth organization made door-to-door calls, warning
against public criticism of the government on pain of arrest . schools
were closed until further notice, and scheduled elections for the
normally rubber-stamp, 123-member national assembly were postponed .
over radio saigon, thich tinh khiet, 80, head of the general buddhist
association, pledged his loyalty to the government, but a newspaper
picture cleared by inattentive censors showed the aged monk with a
black eye and bruises all over his face . the government explained that
he had fallen down . in other respects, censorship was stringent . in
outgoing cables from newsmen, the word catholic was blue-penciled ;
after passing the censors, one story referred to " roman president ngo
dinh diem . " the generals . at week's end martial law was gradually
eased, and some buddhists and students were freed . there was little
doubt that nhu was in large measure responsible for running things, but
there was no evidence that he was supplanting his brother ; as far as
could be detected, the two were working in harmony . directly under
nhu, two officers seemed to be in command : bespectacled, pockmarked
colonel le quang tung, in charge of the special forces, and brigadier
general ton that dinh, commander of the iii army
corps and military governor of saigon, a dapper graduate of the u.s .
command and general staff school at fort leavenworth, who wears a red
beret, carries a swagger stick, and likes to be accompanied on military
operations by his own photographer . of south viet nam's 17 generals,
dinh is one of two who actually have troops at their disposal ; the
other, brigadier general nguyen khanh, is located in a fighting area
hundreds of miles north of saigon . most of the other generals have
been deprived of real power by diem and nhu, and have
been brought to saigon where they can be watched . at a time when the
army is more important than ever in the south viet nam situation, these
officers are carefully scrutinized in washington . among them : major
general tran van don, chief of the general staff and technically in
charge of administering the country under martial law . actually he
commands only a bodyguard of 50 troops, and at the moment is considered
a figurehead . brigadier general tran tu oai, an articulate officer
whom nhu sidetracked into the post of director of the malaria
eradication program . " i'm the only general in the army, " said tran,
/ who is armed with a spray gun . " he is now chief of psychological
warfare . major general duong van minh, a tough, husky type whose mouth
is filled with gold-capped broken teeth and who is regarded as one of
the best officers in south viet nam . he is known as " big " minh, to
distinguish him from brigadier general tran van minh, or " little "
minh, no kin . he has no command at present, but
serves as diem's " military assistant . " brigadier general pham xuan
chien, onetime director of security services, who was sacked by nhu
when his ambitions began to get out of hand . he now has the virtually
meaningless job of assistant chief of staff . determined to dissociate
itself from diem's anti-buddhist policies and to keep the army on its
side the u.s . formally absolved south viet nam's military leaders of
responsibility in nhu's sacking of the buddhist temples . in an
unusually sharp statement, washington said that the generals were " not
aware of the plans to attack the pagodas, much less the brutal manner
in which they were carried out . " saigon bitterly denied the
washington statement produced a document signed by army leaders to the
effect that they had asked the government to take the action
it did . " top u.s . intelligence officials countered that army
leaders had been coerced into signing the document . the alternative .
in a country where intrigue and double-dealing are endemic, the army
officers are far from united . but one top vietnamese official secretly
in contact with army dissidents maintains that a coup can and will be
staged, that both the marines and the air force would join in any
uprising, and that there are enough disaffected army units in saigon
itself to neutralize tung's special forces . at week's end there were
muffled reports that, meeting in twos and threes, officers had agreed
on a leader who would be willing to keep diem as titular head of state
if nhu, his wife, and brother thuc, archbishop of hue, were eliminated
. no matter how real the opposition to diem, the dissidents are
obviously afraid that the u.s . might not fully back them in a coup .
as a first sign of u.s . support, they want washington to announce
cessation of aid to the diem regime . this the u.s . is not prepared to
do because it would only slash whatever influence the u.s . has in
south viet nam . besides, the u.s . believes that the diem regime can
keep going for perhaps a year even without u.s . aid . if the
opposition seems to believe that the u.s . cannot be counted on, the
u.s . reciprocates the feeling . as of last week, at least one major
policymaker in the state department felt that the solution was not to
try to force out diem but to force him into more acceptable behavior
possibly curbing brother nhu and taking other measures to redeem
himself with the buddhists . critics of this policy point out that "
controlling " diem has been a u.s . aim for years, and that no one has
yet managed to do it successfully ; they also believe that diem will
never really break with nhu or any other member of his family . in
their view, diem is now hopelessly discredited, and they urge a
different civilian ruler possibly vice president nguyen ngoe tho, who
has openly disagreed with diem backed by some efficient officers . just
how this can be accomplished is another question . the war . as if the
situation in saigon were not complicated enough, france's charles de
gaulle chose to enter it with an oracular statement that france
sympathized with " the tribulations of the vietnamese people, " and
pledged " cordial cooperation " with " all viet nam " in rooting out "
foreign influence . " he conveniently overlooked the fact that, had it
not been for france's own disastrous defeat in its nine-year vietnamese
war, the country would not be in its present mess . apart from
deliberately antagonizing the u.s . at a moment when it was caught in
an extremely difficult situation, de gaulle sounded as if he were
trying to encourage a united viet nam, with north and south together
again but neutralized . the idea seemed to be supported by none other
than north viet nam's ho chi minh, who last week glowingly predicted
diem's fall, but hinted that he might be followed by a neutralized,
laos-type government . by contrast, china's mao tse-tung, who also
commented on the south viet nam situation, seemed to oppose
neutralization, and predicted that diem would be followed by just
another " u.s . lackey . " in saigon, ambassador lodge, though plainly
playing for time, took hold firmly . in talks with both diem and nhu
(the latter described as " hostile " by insiders), lodge expressed the
u.s.'s sharp disapproval of their repressive policies . pointedly he
rejected the government's demand that the u.s . turn over two buddhist
monks who were given sanctuary in the u.s . aid mission building .
lodge's determination not to be buffaloed impressed top embassy aides .
/ i'm running things here, and i intend to run them with a firm hand, "
he told staffers . " if washington wants a weasel for this job, it can
find someone else . " lodge's first task is to see that the political
maneuvering does not affect the conduct of the war against the
communist
viet cong . at least one troop unit has been moved from a fighting zone
into the capital, and offensive military missions have been somewhat
diminished . but so far, the war against the reds hasn't been
radically hurt by events in saigon .
