europe this was the summer that was " summer's lease hath
all too short a date, " sighed shakespeare in the 18th sonnet, but as
far as most of western europe is concerned, the sooner the lease runs
out the better . after one of the worst winters in memory, this summer
has proved a thing of wind and wetness, of a cool july and august
snows, of record rains and blighted harvests, of burgeoning prices and
other irritants . if such crises of daily living were minor compared
with the test ban treaty or south viet nam, they still meant a
difference between good times and bad for millions of otherwise
flourishing europeans . .britain . plainly, the seaside was fit only
for the fish, and hotelkeepers reported that bookings were off 15q6 .
for the hardy souls who went, getting there was no fun either, since
britain has only 250 miles of superhighways (compared with germany's
1,870) . since a sweeping motorways plan was adopted seven years ago,
the british have been building roads at model t rates, and planners
pale at the thought that by 1980 the current car population of
6,000,000 will have trebled . motorists grow plae at a more immediate
prospect : " transport minister ernest marples' plan to impose
parking-meter charges of 35 #$ an hour in parts of london . perhaps
most symbolic of britain's summertime complaints was the stuttering
progress on the renovation of no . 10 downing street, residence of
british prime ministers since 1735 . a parliamentary commission
pronounced the place a " horror " in 1958, packed harold macmillan off
to nearby admiralty house before the floor gave way beneath him,
estimated that it would take two years and $1,100,000 to repair the
building . but no end is in sight after five years and $8,500,000 .
matters were not helped by 14 work stoppages . but then, the building
workers were only following a pattern, for this, after all, was the
summer when even the beefeaters in the tower struck for higher wages .
.france . what most exasperated frenchmen was the foul weather . in
biarritz, 400 houses were flooded in one day, and in the somme
department, a vacationer died of exposure when he foolhardily went
swimming . there was also the wine crisis (see world business) and fear
of inflation . the latest price increases affected bread and postage
stamps ; since charles de gaulle came to power in 1958, the prices of
250 essential articles have climbed 25 per cent , excluding rents,
which have soared 82 per cent . paris newspapers spoke of a " grave
crisis, " but the government put off a scheduled discussion of the
economic situation until midmonth, when at least the weather may be
better . .germany . despite the abundance of four-lane, cement-paved
autobahnen, which are beginning to crumble at the edges, 10 million
cars owned by prospering west germans and countless tourist autos
clogged the roads in what der spiegel called " the longest traffic jam
in the history of the occident . " one tie-up stretched 20 miles,
involved 4,100 cars . some motorists have been seen drawing water from
nearby brooks and washing their cars while waiting for traffic to get
moving . what saddens some germans even more than the traffic is the
news that more than 200 of the ancient dwellings in heidelberg's
altstadt the " old town " where generations of heidelberg students
loved to stroll are near collapse from neglect and fungus rot . loath
to destroy the altstadt (and along with it a lucrative tourist trade),
heidelbergers are equally reluctant to try to raise the $50 million
needed to restore the buildings . .italy . summer skies were sunny in
italy, but that created its own problems . tourists fleeing from the
frozen north created colossal traffic jams at the brenner pass and
three-hour tie-ups along other roads . italians who flocked to
sardinia's much-ballyhooed costa esmeralda, where the aga khan is
building a resort, found themselves quartered in half-finished hotels
with neither lights nor hot water . and the annual crush of german
tourists never quite materialized . offended by a rash of italian-made
anti-german films, some german newspapers advised their readers to take
their business elsewhere . thousands did so, headed for yugoslavia
instead . .the low countries . in the netherlands, the weather hurt the
corn crop and stunted dutch bulbs, draining them of their brilliant
hues . in belgium, the flax crop is bad, and the wheat harvest in some
places is one-fourth its normal size . but of greater concern to the
belgians than the meager harvest or the tempestuous weather was a new
law that goes into effect this week, creating a formal language barrier
across the land . dutch will be the official tongue in the flemish
north, french in the walloon-dominated south, with pockets of both
peoples stranded on the wrong side . months of demonstrations
culminated last week when hundreds of flemings clashed with walloons at
ostend . it was the beer-bibbing belgians, whose per-capita inflow of
34.3 gallons is the world's highest, who put a foamy head on a
disheartening summer . they scheduled a national beer festival at the
chateau de fraiture in liege province, but before the guzzling could
even get started, the chateau burned down, lock, stock and beer barrels
