blue
black god ! glad i'm black ; pitch-forking devil black : black,
black, black ; ff black absolute of life complete, greedfully grabbing
life's living . . . black blues the blues is the black o' the face, i
said : black is the blues' face ; it's black in the mornin' beige in
the sun, and blue black all night long .
oh, the blues is a black devil face, i said : devil
black is the blues' face ; it's black in the mornin' beige in the sun,
and blue black all night long . my baby, said to me, daddy ; sit down
and listen, candy : the blues is in your blood, black down deep in
your skin and the devil rides on your back . the mean black blues got
my daddy, those black mean blues got you, daddy ; you're black in the
mornin' beige in the sun, candy black all night long . bloke modisane
(south africa) blackman's god our god is great who
dare deny it our god is great powerful and dark peering through ages
healing, killing, guiding . our god is black and like a goddamned god
guiding when loving killing when angered . our god is powerful
all-powerful and black and like all deities our godhead likes blood
whether it be blood of isaac or ram our god likes blood . . . francis
kobina parkes (ghana) who knows ? who knows
? this africa so richly blest with golden lands and fronded palms in
air, the envy of great nations far and near, may yet the world lead
back to peace and rest, goodwill to all . who knows ? who knows ?
and when the fullness of god's time has come and men of divers colors,
tribes and castes have owned him king ; when hate and sin are passed,
the prince of peace may found his home in africa at last . who knows
? who knows ? a . l . milner-brown (ghana)
mother dark mother land long lain asleep her people loved they lived
and killed to live by nature's law . souls to save the strangers
sought, riches, some knowledge, they named her " dark " yes, dark was
she in every sense was dark . they brought " the light " and with the
light she saw her children led in chains their wearied steps quickened
by the lash of cain . . . mother dark she was dark, very dark cried out
and her voice shook all the world, free my people set my sons and
daughters free ! the bearers of light made bold retreat silent
dignified farewell pomp and splendour, saving grace the spoilt child
amidst a thousand shells withdrew . mother dark her rulers chose all
branded with her mark . alas ! they learned too well the " light "
then brought home the yoke . mother dark her wounded heart wailed loud
in pain, is there no hope ? my children perish ! but her voice is
not heard for her children now oppress her children . francesca yetunde
pereira (nigeria)
african poetry
where god is black most black africans
only learned to write down their songs and tales in the past hundred
years, but they are heirs to centuries of oral literature . in their
search for an african identity, the continent's contemporary poets many
of them leading politicians today have forsaken their mission-school
golden treasury to rediscover the pagan rhymes and rhythms that
enlivened tribal life long before the white man came . says leopold
sedar senghor, who is black africa's most distinguished poet as well as
president of senegal : " poetry must find its way back to its origins
. " the attempt to explore and revive these origins is illustrated in a
new anthology, poems from black africa (indiana university press ;
$4.95), edited by u.s . negro poet langston hughes . some of the poets
are self-consciously primitive, and a few of the english-speaking ones
write with echoes of t . s . eliot or gerard manley hopkins . but they
are also busy transcribing and translating traditional folk
to adhiambo i hear many voices like it's said a
madman hears ; i hear trees talking like it's said a medicine man
hears . maybe i'm a madman, i'm a medicine man . maybe i'm mad ; for
the voices are luring me, urging me from the midnight moon and the
silence of my desk to walk on wave crests across a sea . maybe i'm a
medicine man hearing talking saps, seeing behind trees ; but who's
lost his powers of invocation . but the voices and the trees are one
name spelling and one figure silence-etched across the moonface is
walking, stepping over continents and seas . and i raised my hand my
trembling hand, gripping my heart as handkerchief and waved and waved
and waved but she turned her eyes away . gabriel okara
(nigeria) to new york for
jazz orchestra : trumpet solo
poetry and evolving what anthologist hughes hopefully describes as a
literature that " walks with grace and already is beginning to achieve
an individuality quite its own . " most of the black new wave poets are
concerned with negritude, a french word for the essence of blackness
and, by extension, for a world in which despair is white, while god and
innocence are black . many writers celebrate nature and memories of a
pristine africa . most are preoccupied by the west's failure to
understand them . but in their poetry if not in their u.n . speeches
africans waste surprisingly little time inveighing against imperialism,
notwithstanding a tirade by a part-time poet named patrice lumumba, the
late, rabblerousing congolese leader ( " for a thousand years, you,
african, suffered like a beast . . . " ) . a sampler of voices from the
new africa :
first i was
confused by your beauty, by those great golden long-legged girls . so
shy at first before your metallic eyes, your frosted smile so shy . and
the anguish in the depths of skyscraper streets lifting eyes hawkhooded
to the sun'e eclipse . sulphurous your light and livid the towers with
heads that thunderbolt the sky the skyscrapers which defy the storms
with muscles of steel and stone-glazed hide . ff but two weeks on the
bare sidewalks of manhattan at the end of the third week the fever
seizes you with the pounce of a leopard . . . new york ! i say to you
: new york ! let black blood flow into your blood that it may rub
the rust from your steel joints, like an oil of life that it may give
to your bridges the bend of buttocks and the suppleness of creepers .
now return the most aicient times, the unity recovered, the
reconciliation of the lion, the bull and the tree thoughts linked to
act, ear to heart, sign to sense . there are your rivers murmuring with
scented crocodiles and mirage-eyed manatees . and no need to invent the
sirens . but it is enough to open eyes to the rainbow of april and the
ears, above all the ears, to god who out of the laugh of a saxophone
created the heaven and the earth in six days . and the seventh day he
slept the great sleep of the negro . leopold sedar
senghor (senegal) where the
rainbow ends where the rainbow ends there's going to be a place,
brother, where the world can sing all sorts of songs, and we're going
to sing together, brother, you and i, though you're white and i'm not .
it's going to be a sad song, brother, because we don't know the tune,
and it's a difficult tune to learn . but we can learn, brother, you and
i . there's no such tune as a black tune . there's no such tune as a
white tune . there's only music, brother, and it's music we're going to
sing where the rainbow ends . richard rive (south
africa)
