south africa blockade in the air twenty minutes from niamey,
niger, approaching for a night landing, the pilot of the chartered
south african constellation received an unsettling message from the
control tower : turn away or have the plane seized on the ground .
with his fuel tanks almost empty, the pilot had to set down anyway, and
the connie, its crew and 79 passengers most of them white south
africans returning from european holiday were surrounded by black
guards armed with rusty rifles . not until 24 hours later was the
flight allowed to resume, and local authorities warned that in the
future intruding south african planes would be confiscated . at last
may's african " summit conference " in addis ababa, south africa's
neighbors called for an economic boycott, to include the banning of
south african aircraft from airports and airspace . by last week an
air curtain
had closed african skies to south african airways, whose proud symbol
is a winged springbok, forcing its planes into a tortuous detour .
until last month, s.a.a.'s boeing 707 jets operated two efficient
routes between johannesburg and europe one along africa's east fringe,
via nairobi, kenya ; the other almost due north via brazzaville, in
the once-french congo . trouble began when, implementing the addis
ababa agreement, egypt, algeria, ethiopia and sudan barred south
african aircraft from overflying their territories . s.a.a . rerouted
all its flights over libya . but then libya also joined the air
blockade . fortnight ago s.a.a . inaugurated a carefully prepared,
out-of-the-way alternate route around west africa's bulge, via
brazzaville (which so far has not joined the ban), luanda, capital of
portuguese angola, and las palmas in the spanish canary islands (see
map) . the " apartheid route " takes about 900 miles and two hours
longer to europe, costs an estimated $3,000 more to operate each way,
so that s.a.a . may well be hard pressed to preserve its share of the
lucrative european market as well as last year's handsome $1,500,000
profit . as usual, south africa's white regime took its latest
humiliation in stolid stride . following an agreement quietly signed
last may with portugal, its likeminded ally, south africa is putting up
$5,300,000 to help construct a jet airport on the cape verde island of
sal as an additional refueling stop . south african minister of
transport ben schoeman assured everyone that the island-hopping detour
is every bit as safe as the old routes . " we are flying and will keep
flying, " he vowed . the airline has already launched an advertising
campaign extolling the scenic charms of such offbeat places as luanda
and las palmas, and a cape town columnist eloquently extolled the uses
of adversity . " boycotts have turned us into smarter salesmen, " the
pundit wrote . " arms embargoes have forced us to make our own weapons,
and the air ban has sent a patriotic thrill running down the south
african airways fuselage . /
