malaysia tunku yes, sukarno no " in steamy, palm-shaded
kuching, capital of sarawak, the day's biggest excitement is the firing
of the 8 p.m . cannon on the lawn of government house . " what a dull
place, " said a united nations official . " i don't know how we're
going to survive three weeks here . " at the insistence of indonesia's
president sukarno, an eight-member u.n . team is present to " ascertain
/ whether sarawak, and north borneo really want to join the federation
of malaysia, which sukarno bitterly opposes . as the u.n . ascertainers
began to sample opinions around sarawak, they were nearly stoned, not
bored, to death . in the chinese-dominated town of sibu, the
red-infiltrated sarawak united people's party (supp) staged a
demonstration that turned into a 90-minute, stone-throwing riot . only
after police fired warning shots to disperse the mob could the u.n .
team sit down amidst broken glass in a methodist schoolhouse to
interview local councilors . in miri, sarawak's oil-refining center,
3,008 chinese-supported youths, wielding stones and bottles, screamed
anti-malaysia slogans until the police opened fire, wounding two, and
tear gas forced them to scatter . date set . such outbursts will
slightly delay but not derail the formation of malaysia, originally
scheduled for aug . 31 . in last summer's general elections, voters in
both sarawak and north borneo decisively defeated anti-federation
parties . although indonesia's shadow looms large, the borned people
know they have nothing to gain from djakarta but economic chaos and
demagoguery . malayan prime minister tunku abdul rahman and british
colonial secretary duncan sandys, who hastily flew to the scene, last
week set sept . 16 as the new birth date for the federation two days
after the u.n . mission's findings will be made public . both are sure
that the u.n . will find a clear majority in favor of malaysia, but
they insist that the federation will come into being regardless of the
report . the british last week also turned over internal
self-government
to borneo and sarawak . in a wrangle over details with the british,
indonesia failed to send observers to the u.n . mission, thus giving
sukarno an excuse to question the u.n . findings later . but faced with
british determination to defend malaysia by force, if necessary,
sukarno said : " if the borneo peoples agree to join malaysia, we will
have to bow our heads and obey . " but, added sukarno, in an unbowed
postscript : " indonesia maintains its opposition to malaysia . " book
learning . an indonesian guerrilla campaign against borneo and sarawak
may well continue, since djakarta always needs a foreign diversion to
draw attention from domestic difficulties . in indonesian borneo,
which adjoins sarawak, sukarno has set up guerrilla camps along 200
miles of border, and is training 1,000 red-lining chinese from sarawak,
following the guidelines of indonesian defense minister general abdul
haris nasution, an expert on guerrilla warfare who has written his own
book on the subject . bands of his guerrillas pushed across the border
to raid dyak villages clashed with patrols of british-led gurkhas and
sarawak police . in a fire fight ten miles inside sarawak, the
indonesians killed a british lieutenant and wounded several gurkhas
before being routed with heavy losses . meanwhile, british officers are
studying nasution's book for clues to stop further indonesian
incursions . so far, indonesian terrorist attacks have only served to
create a surge of pro-malaysia feeling in borneo and sarawak . almost
nightly, the indonesian embassy in north borneo is plastered with
slogans reading " tunku yes, sukarno no . " although his people stopped
head-hunting years ago, one dyak chief told the u.n . fact finders that
/ if any more indonesian bandits come into our territory, they may lose
their heads . /
