the congo tshombe's twilight the katanga struggle seemed over at
last . it had been a 2f-year siege that brought the u.n . close to
bankruptcy, set the u.s . at odds with its principal european allies
and threatened to immerse central africa in blood . now, katanga's
rebel moise tshombe sat wanly behind a desk in a stucco cottage in the
copper town of kolwezi and declared, " i am ready to proclaim
immediately before the world that katanga's secession is ended . " the
words of the mercurial moise had a familiar ring, and there were
skeptics who suggested the pledge was false . " i'll believe it when i
see it, " said one diplomat in elisabethville . " we know the man, "
shrugged central government premier cyrille adoula in leopoldville . "
it is not the first time that tshombe has declared himself ready to
renounce his ambitions to found an independent state . " wise act . "
but this time tshombe had little choice . blue-helmeted u.n . troops
controlled nearly all the major rail and population centers of katanga
province, and u.n . secretary-general u thant was not backing down on
his threat to crush katanga's wily secessionist . up to the last
moment, tshombe wavered . having fled from elisabethville " a
frightened and dejected man, " in the words of british and belgian
officials, he turned up last week in kolwezi, where the last 3,000 of
his 20,000-man gendarmerie were holed up . a two-man peace mission
composed of jacques houard, belgium's consul general in salisbury,
southern rhodesia, and andre van roey, director of katanga's national
bank, followed him there . for 36 desperate hours, the two urged him to
yield rather than carry out his threat to blow up the huge dams and
copper and cobalt mines operated by the giant union miniere company in
kolwezi . finally, convinced that he had no alternative, tshombe gave
in . later, apparently to show newsmen what might have happened, he
drove them to a minor hydroelectric substation 70 miles outside
kolwezi, aimed a six-pound artillery piece at it and pulled the lanyard.
the shot was right on target . the substation, apparently loaded with
dynamite, disintegrated while tshombe guffawed . as a final act of
obstreperousness he had peacemaker houard thrown out of katanga
because, as foreign minister evariste kimba complained, " you have done
nothing for us . " but tshombe was beaten nonetheless . even his old
ally, sir roy welensky, prime minister of the rhodesias and nyasaland,
told him he had " acted wisely " in yielding . is everybody happy ?
the central government promised moise " a general and complete amnesty
/ for himself and his followers . with that, tshombe returned to
elisabethville to work out the procedures of his capitulation with u.n.
officials . he found that some of the details had already been taken
care of the blue-and-gold flag of the central government now fluttered
over the katangese defense ministry . sixty civil servants and 120
congolese army officers arrived from leopoldville to take over
katanga's military remnants and administer postal service,
telecommunications, customs and immigration . as resident minister,
leopoldville's top man in katanga would be slight, sober joseph ileo,
40, a moderate who served as interim premier of the congo after erratic
patrice lumumba was deposed in 1960 . the question now was whether
leopoldville's central government could keep katanga under control now
that it was won . if the mob violence back in leo itself was any
indication, u.n . troops would have to stay on in katanga for quite a
while . down leo's boulevard albert stormed 600 students and street
urchins, shouting " tshombe to the gallows ! " at the british
embassy, which is considered fair game because of london's friendly
policy toward katanga, the mob battered down the doors, sacked the
offices, and tried to pry off a coat of arms because, as one student
cried, " it's made of katanga copper .! " after an hour, the u.n.'s
congo chief robert gardiner arrived and scattered the mob . all the
while, a jeepload of adoula's cops sat chuckling near by, making no
move to stop pillage .
