amen ! for generations
the white women's burden in steamy southeast asia has been shouldered
by amahs, the softfooted, tough-fibered maidservants who were recruited
from the chinese mainland . while the amah (literally, " little mother
/ ) cooked, cleaned and looked after the children, the colonel's lady
or planter's wife spent her mornings at tennis, her afternoons at
bridge, and appeared freshly starched on the veranda at sundown to
greet her returning husband with cold stingers, hot curry and eternal
complaint about the hardships of life in the tropics . in malaya and
singapore today, a mem-sahib is more apt to spend her day screaming at
the amah, doing the housework herself, or else trying to poach the
perfect gem who works for the arbuthnots . for the old-style amahs,
whose white tunics, black silk pajama trousers and smoothly braided
hair made them look like pigtailed penguins, belong to a dying race .
smashed wedgwood . most new nations of southeast asia have enough
trouble already with chinese minorities and are dead-set against
bringing in more refugees from the mainland . hastening their
extinction is the fact that many of the finer amahs are cantonese women
who traditionally belong to kongsis, or sisterhoods, that pledge them
to spinsterhood . amahs from hainan, on the other hand, are usually
married . their husbands used to be admirable crichtons of colonial
society, and their daughters in time used to follow mother's footsteps
across the gleaming floors .
though well-trained amahs nowadays earn up to $70 a month a high wage
for malaya their daughters mostly prefer office and factory jobs that
give them greater freedom with no overtones of colonialism . their
places are being taken by a new generation of flibbertigibbets whose
minds are apt to be more on men than helping the " mem . " mostly
malayan or indian girls, with a sprinkling of untrained chinese, they
are prettier and more sophisticated than their forebears and, say their
mems, often downright insolent . for their part, the maids complain
bitterly that the rapidly expanding malayan middle class is even more
tyrannical than the bossiest britons . if fledgling amahs have a talent
for smashing the wedgwood, the wives of british soldiers and
technicians, coming from a land where servants have vanished from all
but the stateliest homes, tend to be even clumsier at handling the help
. wailed one sub-lieutenant's wife who recently hired her first maid :
/ i don't know whether to treat her as a servant or a sister . " fringe
benefits . the amahs' answer is that they should be treated as civil
servants . in malaya an army of 1,000 amahs donned sunday-best sarongs,
cheongsams and saris, piled into a fleet of busses and drove into kuala
lumpur, the capital, where they minced prettily through the winding
streets waving placards inscribed : we want justice and we are not
animals . the demonstration, which left blimps snorting and oldstyle
amahs sneering, climaxed a complicated dispute in which the amahs'
union is challenging a british war office decision to abandon its
practice of hiring and firing all the amahs employed by military
personnel . some 3,000 unionized amahs have already forced the british
to boost their pay and cut their work time from 70 to 48 hours weekly .
by remaining government employees, they hope also to win full civil
service status, with its rich welfare benefits . in its zeal, the union
even cabled london, " respectfully " requesting queen elizabeth to
intervene in the dispute . after unsuccessful talks with the military
and british high commissioner sir geofroy tory, the aroused amahs last
week direly threatened a walkout . for many of their mems, no help at
all could hardly be worse than the helpless help they had .
