communists advice from the host winding up his 15-day state visit
to yugoslavia last week, nikita khrushchev found himself playing an
unusual role that of listener . evidently he hoped to offset the
russian split with red china by getting closer to tito, with whom
relations ever since 1955 have alternated between fairly warm and
fairly chilly . khrushchev not only swallowed tito's determination to
maintain his status as a communist " independent, " but in a four-day
session at the island retreat of brioni patiently listened to his
host's advice on how to outbid the chinese in the struggle for the
leadership of the red world . red summit . according to probably
deliberate conference leaks, tito told khrushchev that russia must play
up to the emerging afro-asian nations to halt increasing chinese
penetration . added tito : as long as china is not a member of the u.n
. (both russia and yugoslavia favor peking's admission, but with waning
enthusiasm), moscow could make headway by supporting the afro-asian
drive for membership in the u.n . security and economic and social
councils . tito also said that russia is being too doctrinaire in
writing off afro-asian countries such as syria, algeria, egypt and
iraq, which have outlawed local communist parties . since most of the
emerging states are adopting one-party socialist governments anyway,
said tito, the soviets should back them for the time being, worry about
pushing communism later . tito and khrushchev agreed to hold an
anti-chinese communist summit conference soon, both to consolidate
russia's position in the conflict with china and to state formally that
chinese warmongering is far more harmful to world communism than
yugoslavia's " revisionism . " but tito and his guest seemed to shy
away from much closer relations . tito ignored khrushchev's apparent
desire to address the yugoslav parliament, and russia cold-shouldered
yugoslavia's request for massive economic aid, granted belgrade only
observer status in comecon, the satellites' more or less common market
. " differences still exist between us on party matters, " said one
yugoslav official . " if we press for closer contacts, an open quarrel
might develop . " on to cuba . at a joint press conference with tito,
khrushchev announced that he is not coming to the u.n . general
assembly in new york this month but is going to cuba instead, also
hinted that he might be available for a visit to egypt . then he gave
the press a sample of his famous earthiness . when a questioner sought
to bring out discord between russia and yugoslavia by asking him to
compare living standards in the two countries (higher in yugoslavia),
khrushchev got angry . " why are you trying to sniff a smell from the
rectum ? " he said . " this is not the most beautiful part of the
body . " anyway, khrushchev added blissfully, soviet relations with
yugoslavia are " eternal . /
