united nations anger in the council adlai stevenson had not been
so angry in the u.n . since last year's cuban crisis . " this
reprehensible act of murder, " he said before the security council, "
deserves the strongest condemnation . outrages of this kind cannot pass
without the stern disapproval of the international community . /
stevenson was referring
to a bloody flare-up on the israeli-syrian frontier touched off, israel
charged, when ten syrian soldiers sneaked across the jordan river and
the demilitarized zone and machine-gunned two 19-year-old farmers
irrigating a kibbutz field north of the sea of galilee . the syrians
denied the killings, accused israel of sending 15 armored cars charging
across the border . last week, with both countries having brought
complaints to an emergency session of the security council (its 202nd
session on a palestine-related issue), the u.n.'s truce chief on the
scene, norwegian lieut . general odd bull, left little doubt that syria
had been the aggressor . backed up by photographs, spent bullets and
diagrams, bull's report told of finding " two dead bodies riddled with
holes ; a tractor with numerous bullet holes ; a magazine from an
automatic weapon ; a lever handle from a grenade ; . . . a pool of
blood where one man allegedly had been shot, leaving part of his brain
; tracks leading from the direction of the jordan river to the ambush
position and the tracks returning in the direction of the jordan river
. " in the past, israel has usually made routine complaints to the
u.n . when there were
truce breaches on the bristling border, then staged heavily retaliatory
raids of its own . when such incidents came before the security
council, the u.s . usually stayed neutral . this time israel had
followed u.s . advice and appealed for security council action hence
the u.s . policy switch to support israel . at week's end the u.s . and
great britain introduced a joint resolution that condemned " the wanton
murder " and called " the attention of the syrian arab republic " to
the assembled evidence . the russians, who in the past have usually
threatened to use their veto in support of the arabs, backed moroccan
amendments watering down the u.s.-british resolution ; the moroccan
version avoided condemnation of syria and merely registered " regrets
for the death of two persons . /
