red china the self-bound gulliver
(see cover) " communism is not love ! " cried mao tse-tung . "
communism is a hammer we use to destroy our enemies ! " mao, the
somewhat enigmatic ruler of red china, has certainly been flailing in
all directions with his hammer of late, but nothing much has been
destroyed . even nikita khrushchev, mao's most recent target, has
emerged unscathed from peking's incessant blows . the only thing mao
has done with his paper hammer is to fan new hatreds for himself and
his red regime . tiny allies . not too long ago, red china had friends
galore . many of the underdeveloped nations of asia, and colonial
peoples everywhere, listened admiringly to mao's boastful plans of a
swift transition from poverty to plenty . the left wing in western
europe and the u.s., disenchanted with stalin's terror, saw mao as a
new and nobler architect of a peoples' socialism . in the united
nations, it seemed only a matter of time before rambunctious afro-asian
votes overcame u.s . resistance to the idea of taking china's seat away
from the nationalists on formosa and giving it to the communist regime
. but mao finds little sympathy anywhere in the world today . he has
embroiled his hard-pressed country in simultaneous feuds with the u.s.,
the soviet union and india, the three most populous nations in the
world after his own . in fact, he has plunged china into an isolation
so complete that he can count as certain allies only tiny north korea
in asia and even tinier albania in europe .
it seems like sheer
lunacy for mao to challenge the two greatest powers on earth at a time
when china's industry and agriculture are still staggering from the
disasters of the great leap forward and before he has the armaments to
engage in any large-scale contest . but it is entirely possible that
mao may have come to feel that the only way to break china's economic
fetters, and still abide by his harsh ideological tenets, lies in a
dramatic change in the international political order . to that end he
has emphasized both race and color in his attempt to win friends and
alliances . red china has always dreamed of one day employing
indonesia's oil, thailand's rice, even japan's technology, as fuel for
a huge asian alliance that could safely defy the west . and now mao has
been emphasizing color as a way to align the have-not nations of asia
and africa against the west .
pandas & tigers . it would seem obvious that mao
tse-tung has enough trouble at home without looking for it abroad . the
great leap forward, launched with such fanfare in 1958, was intended to
bring quick success in 1) building a pure communist state, and 2)
making china over into a first-class world power . instead, the leap's
frenzied mobilization of peasants into communes, the setting up of
backyard blast furnaces, and the 24-hour-a-day speedup in the factories
nearly wrecked the nation . today, china's aging red leadership
(average age : 63) knows that it will never see the promised land, and
that china must labor on for at least a quarter century perhaps much
longer before accomplishing the second goal . what manner of country
and what sort of people must the communists deal with in trying to
accomplish their mission ? china, of course, is enormous 14 times the
size of texas . it extends 2,400 miles from the banks of the amur river
in topmost manchuria to the tropical jungle border with viet nam, and
2,500 miles across from the indented coast on the china sea to the
kunlun mountains deep in central asia . inside this vast domain lies
just about every variety of flora and fauna imaginable, from rollicking
pandas to prowling tigers, from the invigorating ginseng root to groves
of thin nanmu trees . to its people, china simply means " here . "
since the days of prehistory, china has traditionally been a world in
itself, separated from outside barbarians by the most perfect of
physical barriers . on the east and south is the pacific, the largest
of oceans . to the west rises the highest plateau on earth . in the
north stretch thousands of miles of desert ; and here, to prevent
repeated incursions of hard-riding nomads . chinese emperors built the
1,500-mile great wall . rebellion's home . though united by an ancient
culture, china has never been as monolithic as it looks . an eastwest
line drawn across the country between the valleys of the yangtze and
yellow rivers divides north from south china . north of the line,
summers are short and hot, winters long and bitterly cold, and the
principal crops are wheat and millet . the men of north china are often
as tall as americans, relatively placid, ceremonial and say the
southerners slow-thinking . south of the line, the climate is hot and
humid, and the principal crop is rice . broken up into valleys and
small plains by innumerable mountain ranges, the south is the home of
individualism, anarchy and mystical introspection . the shortstatured
southerners speak a multitude of dialects, are commercially
enterprising and perennially rebellious almost every chinese revolution
has originated in the south . practically all chinese citizens of the
u.s . came originally from a small south china area near canton called
toishan, which is today, curiously enough, known in china as " the home
of volleyball . /
nation's birthplace . china's 22 provinces baffle
foreigners because so many of them sound alike (honan, hunan ;
kiangsu, kiangsi nsi, shensi) . most typical of the northern provinces
is perhaps hopeh, which contains the capital city of peking . from its
rugged border with manchuria, the province runs down in a shelving
plain to the shallow gulf of chihli . very few eminent communists come
from hopeh or its neighboring province of shansi, which is noted for
sacred mountains and such spectacular cave temples as yun kang, where a
mile-long cliff face has been chiseled into thousands of buddhist
images . shensi is reverenced as the birthplace of the chinese nation,
and when the country was first unified by the ch'in dynasty in 221
b.c., its capital was near present-day sian . south china is a much
larger and more varied region than the north . the people of kiangsi
are the scots of china and are said to be clannish, stingy and
quarrelsome . they have had long experience of communism and,
presumably, few illusions, since the chinese soviet republic was
established there in 1931 and held out against the nationalists until
1934, when mao led what was left of his troops on the 8,000-mile long
march to yenan in the north . kiangsi's sound-alike neighbor, kiangsu,
had a reputation for voluptuousness and easy living . the kiangsu city
of soochow was the sybaris of old china, and prostitutes in all parts
of the country tried to imitate the soft soochow dialect with its
musical, rounded vowels . land of leaders . the fruit-rich province of
shantung, home of confucius and his fellow sage mencius, is inhabited
by a sturdy peasantry that speaks a mandarin dialect so harsh and
unmelodic that chinese say, " better to quarrel with a man from soochow
than to converse civilly with a shantungese . " beautiful szechwan
boasts that it grows enough food to feed five provinces, and it is
filled with terraced hills, rivers, coal and valuable minerals . anhwei
contains the sugar-loaf mountains and pinnacled rocks made famous by
the misty paintings of chinese artists . to the communists, the three
most important provinces are the southern states of hunan, chekiang and
kwangtung, which produced most of today's red leaders. mao tse-tung
was born near the capital city of changsha, as was his no . 2 man, liu
shao-chi . other red hunanese : labor boss li li-san, army commanders
peng teh-huai and lo jung-huan . kwangtung, with its capital city of
canton, is the nerve center of south china . its men have a reputation
for pugnacity and business enterprise, its women for slim, almondeyed
beauty . way out west . beyond china proper extend vast territories
that were conquered centuries ago but often lightly held by the chinese
. the broad plains of manchuria have become the three provinces of
kirin, heilungkiang, and liaoning . shenyang, formerly known as mukden,
is the pittsburgh of china, and its steel mills are within sight of the
felt-covered tents of manchu herdsmen, who are now outnumbered about 30
to 1 by chinese immigrants .
as well as most of generalissimo chiang kai-shek's unseated kuomintang
chiefs .
at inner mongolia begins china's far west, which
almost exactly resembles that of the u.s . prairie, desert and towering
mountains and is inhabited by the chinese equivalent of american
indians, the uighur, kazakh and khirghiz tribesmen, who are distinct in
race and religion (moslem) from their overlords . the tribesmen have
repeatedly rebelled against all central governments and make no
exception of the communist regime . leap's loss . no one can say with
accuracy how many people live within china's borders . the communists'
1953 census said 582 million . the chinese nationalists argue that this
figure was too high ; in fact, says the u.s . census bureau, it was
far too low, and virtually all western experts agree . in any case, the
u.s . state department believes that china's population in june of this
year was somewhere in the neighborhood of 720 million . this land and
this people have now lived for 14 years under the rule of the
communists . the gains have been convulsive : schools built at the
same frenzied pace as tractor plants ; hospitals rushed up in
provinces that had scarcely even seen a doctor ; roads and railways
thrown over gorges, through mountains and across deserts . the pace was
so fast and frenzied that it resulted in mismanagement and
administrative lunacy to the extent that the communists have lost china
a good five years in its rebuilding, and the nation is now estimated to
be just about where it was in 1957 in industry and crop production .
even in 1957, supplies were just barely sufficient for needs, and since
that time, at least 70 million more chinese have been born and must be
fed, clothed, housed and educated . peking has dug into its slender
cash reserves to buy wheat from abroad at a total cost of $782 million
. the quarrel with russia has been
equally damaging . when soviet engineers and
technicians were abruptly called home in 1960, they not only left many
construction jobs incomplete but also took their blueprints with them .
peking finds spare parts for soviet equipment hard to get, and must
cannibalize some machines to keep others working . many factories are
now devoted to making spare parts instead of new items . heavy industry
has had to give way to light, and at least two plants formerly making
railroad cars are now turning out rubber-tired handcarts and
wheelbarrows . iron monuments . agriculture is china's jugular vein,
and the year's critical period is the winter crop harvest, which takes
place in spring and early summer . current estimates are that this
year's crop will fluctuate around the 180-185 million tons of grain
achieved last year a good but not a sensationally great harvest year .
the communes of the great leap exist no longer
except on paper, and the countryside is dotted with rusting pillars of
pig iron, melancholy memorials of the backyard furnaces that mao
thought would revitalize china . the typical farm unit now is a
production team of 25 to 40 families, which are given considerable
autonomy in deciding what and when to plant . private plots were
returned to the peasants in 1961, and are producing well for the free
market . as usual, the communists keep close watch : the stick comes
down in the form of close regulation of the free market, and the carrot
is dangled in the guarantees of slightly higher prices for crops sold
to the state over and above the compulsory deliveries . in the past and
in the foreseeable future, every harvest becomes a time of national
breath holding . in a borderline economy like that of china, any
improvement is immediately felt, and so is every decline . double
selves . but what most threatens the regime is the squandered reserves
of good will among millions of chinese who had been impressed by the
communists' display of strength, incorruptibility and iron discipline .
more than by physical labor, the chinese have been worn out by mass
brain-washing sessions, public-accusation meetings, collective
confessions, and endless " struggle " conferences in which relays of
reds upbraid backsliders . as a result, harried citizens develop what
one expert calls " double selves, an outer, superficial self that
conforms to communist demands, and an inner, moral self that remains
hidden . " but in general, rigid discipline fell away with the collapse
of the great leap, and food rations were increased to appease a restive
citizenry . more recently, a new campaign has been instituted to stamp
out apathy . it is a more sophisticated project . these days no one
urges the citizenry to collect flies in matchboxes ; the cry is :
fight waste, fight corruption, fight privilege . nice to mothers . some
of the trappings of the new propaganda campaign are weird . in recent
months, newspapers and magazines have rejoiced over the behavior of the
/ good 8th company on nanking road, " an army detachment on garrison
duty in the heart of wicked shanghai . these heroes have preserved
their communist purity for 14 long years in the face of innumerable
temptations by bourgeois capitalist devils . when " professional
loafers " tried to bribe them with wads of banknotes, the money was
spurned ; when " overdressed women accosted them on the street, the
soldiers ordered them away . " one soldier found a penny and promptly
turned it over to the company's political instructor, who explained to
the others : " one cent is almost nothing, but if he had kept it, he
would have a shady spot in his heart . /
even more edifying is the case of 22-year-old lei feng,
a squad leader in an army transport company stationed in manchuria . in
the bad old days, his father was buried alive by the japanese, his two
brothers starved to death, and his mother hanged herself after being
raped by a landlord . in the good new days, lei feng was always helping
old ladies across streets, buying railway tickets for mothers who had
lost theirs, rushing out to do volunteer work on dikes and canals, and
digging with his fingers when his shovel broke . lei feng died last
year in an accident but, fortunately for the propagandists, left behind
a 200,000-word diary filled with such sentiments as " i think my
purpose in life is to work for a better life for others, " and, " i am
all for the party, socialism and communism . " hailed as the ideal
communist, lei feng is intended to be the model for chinese youth who
have trouble identifying with the grizzled veterans of the long march
and the civil war . in the past year, at least 40 books have been
written about lei feng, and 1,000 storytellers roam the villages
enthralling illiterate peasants with his exploits and his love of mao .
collecting coupons . but if lei feng represents the mythical young
chinese, what is the reality like .? one answer came last week from a
u.s . turncoat, belgian-born albert belhomme, a former g.i . who had
defected to china after the korean war . after ten years in china,
belhomme and two other u.s . defectors, lowell skinner and scott rush,
became politically disillusioned and were allowed to leave the country
. belhomme says the average wage at the paper factory in tsinan where
he was employed was about $18 a month . single workers lived in
dormitories with four bunks to a room, families in oneroom apartments
in blocks of brick flats . during lunch breaks at the factory, belhomme
recalls, workers " talked mostly about food, how to get food, and
prices . " when an office worker referred to the communist cadres as "
golden boys, " his reward was a trip to a " labor-education camp, " and
then to jail . on his return to the factory, he was re-employed, but as
a common laborer . in china today, food is plentiful in some areas,
scarce in others . so it is with items such as cloth . last year, when
the cloth ration in canton was only 1f feet per person annually, it was
7 feet in tsinan . to buy commodities, workers needed coupons as well
as money : one coupon, plus the necessary cash price, got a small
cooking pot . each citizen also received a ticket for two bars of
toilet soap a year, and one of laundry soap per month, and there were
ration cards for cooking oil, flour, sugar and sweets . the meat ration
in tsinan is currently three ounces a month, and grain is 37 pounds for
men doing " medium-heavy " work . (most towns also have free markets,
at which food is available off ration at high prices.) says belhomme :
/ people are not hungry today, but they are definitely not full . /
the grimness and scarcity of life in china is
sometimes brightened by exploits testifying to the ingenuity and dogged
work of its citizens . canada's dr . wilder penfield, one of the
world's top neurosurgeons, returned last week from red china and told
of a university of shanghai medical team that built a heart-lung
machine from scratch in 18 months . when they tested it with dogs, the
animals died of air bubbles in the heart . the chinese went back to
work, guided only by articles in medical journals, and three years
later came up with a far better machine which has now been used in 60
successful openheart surgical cases . planned blessings . china's
future depends largely upon the pillars of the party : the army and
the students . from all three must come the skills and dedication
needed to deal with the staggering problems posed by overpopulation and
underproduction . at the top of the pyramid is chairman mao tse-tung,
whom the party acknowledges to be omnipotent and incapable of mistakes
. the people are endlessly told that mao is the sun, the lodestar, the
living buddha, and he is said to be far greater " than the empty,
hypocritical and negative jesus christ . " peasants are taught to sing
: the sun is rising in the east . china has brought forth a mao
tsetung . he plans blessings for the people . aiyayao, he is the
peoples' great savior ! whatever the propaganda, mao has worked for
more than 30 years with the other six members of the standing committee
of the 19-man politburo without an internal bloodbath a record
unmatched by any other modern tyranny, communist or fascist . among
this band of brothers, dissent is possible you may lose your job but
not your head . economic chief chen yun opposed mao's great leap and it
only cost him a temporary fall from power . the other five committeemen
are heir apparent liu shao-chi (time, oct . 12, 1959), premier chou
en-lai (time, may 10, 1954), defense minister lin piao, vice premier
teng hsiao-ping and congress chairman chu teh . unhappy generals . the
people's liberation army now 2,600,000 strong is by far the most
impressive product of red china, but there is evidence of
dissatisfaction at the top and bottom of the army . among the generals,
those having a guerrilla mentality conflict with the professionals, who
argue that to obtain the supplies needed by a modern army, china must
cooperate closely with the soviet union . defense minister peng
teh-huai, leading spokesman for the professionals, was dismissed from
his post in 1959, but remains a member of the communist central
committee . the sino-soviet split seriously hampers the air force
(3,000 planes, half of them old-fashioned mig-15 fighters), which has
been dependent on russia for aircraft, jet fuel and spare parts . the
split with moscow doubtless upset many high-ranking officers, and last
may the party launched one of the biggest of its periodic cleansings of
the armed forces . nineteen new army regulations were announced . their
aim was to " place the army under absolute party leadership and to
guarantee that the army will advance victoriously in line with the
directives of party chairman mao tse-tung . /
peking posters . red china's educational system is based
on promotion of the best students and work for the rest often as "
cultured peasants " to raise the intellectual level in the villages .
these luckless students and their families hate the whole business, and
the communist press is campaigning to make ex-students " gladly "
accept their work assignments . one paper recently heaped glory on the
college students who smirked scarcely at all when one old grad came
back to take a job on the campus cleaning the toilets . the schools
have become a casualty of the great leap . in 1961-62 enrollment was
cut 20 per cent , and then cut another 20 per cent the following year .
this is a dangerous business, for it was student disaffection that made
the communists' task all the easier in their final big push against the
kuomintang . communism's problem, at this moment of industrial
slowdown, is that there is a shortage of technical and managerial jobs,
not of educated people . the communist party has viewed the students
with considerable suspicion ever since the period of the hundred
flowers, when student manifestos and posters denouncing government
excesses were slapped on every space available . some tattered bits of
these inflammatory posters still cling to the walls and ceilings at
peking university, which has an enrollment of 100,000 . among the
thousands of chinese refugees pouring into hong kong in the past year
and a half there has been a small trickle of engineers and
intellectuals, former believers who are now disillusioned . they are
not party members, and the number is not large ; the significance lies
in the fact that it is the first time such communist-educated
intellectuals have been fleeing red china . sheaf of secrets . the
sino-soviet exchanges are reaching such a point of bitterness that in
earlier and simpler times, both nations would have been mobilizing
their armies . yet, for all the intemperateness of its language, peking
has been notably cautious about getting deeply involved beyond red
china's own frontiers in line with the red chinese axiom, " despise the
enemy strategically, but respect him tactically . " the west got an
inside look at red china's perspective on great-power conflicts back in
1961, when u.s . agents obtained possession of a 40,000-word sheaf of
secret bulletins that had been issued to officers by the general
political affairs department of red china's army . in one bulletin,
laos was described as an imperialist cork to keep chinese influence out
of southeast asia . with typical self-concern, the chinese called laos
the " focus " of the " worldwide anti-imperialist struggle, " although,
for the russians, berlin was far more vital . but peking welcomed the
cease-fire ordered by the geneva agreements . partly, this was in line
with their traditional formula of fight a little, talk a little . the
captured documents disclosed the military tie-up with the 1961 spring
of despair at home, when red china faced internal uprisings, widespread
food shortages, and morale problems in the army itself . soldiers
grumbled at conditions in the villages, complaining that " at present,
what the farmers eat is even worse than what dogs eat, " and charging "
village cadres with beating and scolding people just as in the old
society . " peking wanted no additional trouble in laos . where's the
bomb ? another reason for chinese caution was the gloomy conviction
that moscow would withhold help . warned a communist general, " if
there is a war within three to five years, we will have to rely on the
weapons we now have . " today the weapons china most desperately wants
nuclear warheads are nowhere in sight . peking is so bitter about
moscow's reneging on its 1957 agreement to help create a red chinese
atom bomb that it has broadcast details of the russian about-face .
chinese physicists are now believed to be two to three years away from
detonating a nuclear blast, farther still from what the experts call a
/ significant capability . " but work proceeds on the project, for
peking hopes that achievement of nuclear status, however primitive,
will gain prestige among the underdeveloped millions on earth whose
respect and alliance the red chinese are out to win .
the noise from peking showed no sign of diminishing and continued to
fascinate the non-communist world with fresh tales of old skeletons in
communist
closets . in one announcement, red china took full credit for forcing a
weak-kneed khrushchev ( " who had decided to abandon socialist hungary
to counterrevolution " ) to send russian tanks into budapest and crush
the 1956 uprising . peking radio also made an unprecedented reference
to important factional disputes within the top ranks of the chinese
communist party . khrushchev was accused of openly voicing support for
/ antiparty elements " in china . western experts believe the chinese "
elements " khrushchev was supporting were military men who opposed the
growing sino-soviet split, most likely former defense minister peng
teh-huai and his deputy, huang ke-cheng . khrushchev is additionally
charged with trying to sell peking on a " two chinas " plan as a means
of settling mao's quarrel with generalissimo chiang kai-shek . peking
radio also confirmed earlier reports that russia was stirring up the
kazakh tribesmen in sinkiang against their chinese masters . only last
year, red china charged, russia had lured some 10,000 kazakhs in
sinkiang into crossing the border into soviet kazakhstan . despite
repeated protest from peking, russia refused to give back the kazakhs
because of " humanitarianism " a pretext that china clearly regarded
as ludicrous . whether or not red china succeeds in its great design to
be leader of an afro-asian-latin american alliance, mao tse-tung will
not be around to see the result . at 69, mao now needs help in walking
. he disappears for long stretches, reportedly to meditate in his
pavilion facing lovely west lake in hangchow . no one really knows why
he gave up the chairmanship of the government in 1958 after one term in
office . perhaps it was to devote more time to his key job as head of
the party . or was he preparing an orderly transition for his successor
? so deep is the cleavage between china and the soviet union that it
could hardly be resolved except by the death or disappearance of either
mao or khrushchev . but, after mao, who ? the immediate successor is
almost certain to be liu shao-chi, the party's no . 2 man . after that,
it is anyone's guess . comments a china expert : " from the outside,
one can see the forces that must, or should be, coming to grips in the
arena of china's internal power struggle . but we can only see these
forces intellectually and, i repeat, from the outside . we can't
translate them into real developments or individuals within china . "
waiting in the wings are the young and middle-aged party
leaders pragmatic technicians rather than fanatic dogmatists who have
been frustrated during the years of old guard rule . mao and the
veterans of the long march have suffered few deaths . but a series of
state funerals is obviously and actuarially, in the cards . china's
future, and that of world communism, clearly depends on which emergent
chinese communists will carry the coffins .
