middle east the mess in yemen the nasty little war in
yemen, one year old this month, is dragging on in grand disregard for
the peace-seeking efforts of the u.n . neither egypt nor saudi arabia
has honored its pledge, which both made earlier this year under u.s .
mediation pressure, to disengage simultaneously from yemen . although
nasser has sent home six shiploads of troops, he has rotated in fresh
detachments, and at least 20,000 egyptian soldiers are still in yemen
propping up the republican regime of president abdullah sallal . all
the while, money and munitions from the monarchies of saudi arabia and
jordan still pour across the 25-mile-wide buffer zone to royalist
tribesmen supporting dethroned imam mohamed el badr . so far as the
actual fighting is concerned, it is still a standoff, with the
republicans controlling the cities and the plains, and the royalists
holed up in and defending key strong points in the central mountains .
short rations . it is all very frustrating for the 200-man u.n . team,
which was rushed to the scene from the gaza strip two months ago in an
effort to stop the shooting . the unit, made up mostly of yugoslav
soldiers and canadian airmen, was far too small to police the vast,
empty yemen frontier, and from the start it was plagued by bad breaks
and hostility from local authorities . the team's first commander,
swedish major general carl von horn, had hardly set up headquarters in
the mudwalled capital of san " a when his horse, being led down a dusty
street, kicked a yemeni government official, resulting in the arrest of
both groom and horse . u.n . planes are regularly fired on (none has
been downed so far), and last month a russian-made egyptian ilyushin
jet bomber attacking najran inside saudi arabia nearly scored a
direct hit on a u.n . platoon . getting into the act, the russians have
sent in at least 900 workmen and technicians, who are constructing a
new jet airport north of san " a . recently, the russians threw an
inquiring u.n . inspector off the premises when he approached the
airport to conduct a routine inspection . apart from such harassment,
the u.n . teams found it downright dangerous to travel around the
country . all in all, admitted u.n . secretary-general u thant, in
effect, the u.n.sanctioned project has been a flop . and for him it has
been a rather messy flop, for in the past three weeks he and von horn
have had an ugly exchange of recriminations . the prestigious but
stormy von horn, first u.n . chief in the congo and for five years head
of the u.n.'s palestine peace-keeping force, suddenly resigned in a
cable to thant, charging lack of sufficient logistic support, aircraft
and even rations . thant branded von horn's charges " irresponsible and
reckless, " announced last week
that the mission would continue, thanks to " oral
assurances " by egypt and saudi arabia that they would continue
splitting the bill ($200,000 per month) for another two months . sick
rebel . one victim of the yemen conflict is the man who started it all
by overthrowing the imam : ex-palace guard, now president and field
marshal, abdullah sallal, 42 . last month sallal flew to cairo for
talks with nasser, but entered a hospital and was discharged for
convalescence only last week . a physician who helped treat sallal
confided that he was suffering from a nervous breakdown . " president
nasser visited him once briefly . we gave him tranquilizers . we
brought in egypt's greatest comedian, ismayen yessin, to raise his
spirits . we showed him movies . we flew in his wife from yemen, " the
doctor related, but added sadly : " his sickness is really political .
if we could give him good news about yemen, he would recover . "
