hungary " humanizing " communism after the revolutions of 1848
swept the continent, hungarian patriot lajos kossuth said that his
countrymen were the " reddest republicans in europe . " today, seven
years after russian tanks crushed the hungarian revolt, hungary's 14
million people are fast becoming europe's most republican reds .
western influences pop up everywhere throughout the country . despite a
scarcity of eggs and meat, store windows display elizabeth arden
cosmetics, napoleon brandy and a selection of scotch . modern art hangs
on gallery walls, and newspaper censorship has been relaxed ; when
president kennedy's sisters, pat lawford and jean smith, visited
budapest, television and radio crews dogged their footsteps .
restrictions against travel to the west have been eased ; long lines
of visa applicants daily queue up outside western embassies in
budapest, and it is now chic for vacationing hungarian couples to agree
to meet in venice . hungary's new look is largely the result of efforts
by premier janos kadar to wipe out the stain of having personally
called in russian troops and tanks to suppress the 1956 revolution .
having found that a lighter yoke yields greater economic prosperity and
less political unrest, kadar has made hungary next to poland the most
liberal of the satellite regimes . that, of course, is still very much
a relative matter, but hungarians are grateful for small favors . "
times can never be the same again, " says one . " the revolt was not in
vain . " subtle revision.kadar's new stance has had a favorable effect
at the u.n., which since 1956 has refused to approve or disapprove the
credentials of kadar's u.n . delegates (though they actually take part
in debates and vote) . the final trace of u.n . disapproval disappeared
recently when secretary-general u thant spent three days in hungary and
seven hours with kadar himself . even the u.s., unable to round up
continued support to block hungarian accreditation, will not oppose the
official seating of hungary's delegation at the next general assembly
session . aiming to " humanize communism, " kadar has sacked stalinist
political hacks, appointed non-communists to cabinet posts, and allowed
nonparty members to serve in the parliament . he has granted amnesty to
thousands of political prisoners and encouraged refugees who fled in
1956 to return with free pardons ; today the government claims that
more than one-third of 1956's 200,000 refugees have come back home .
worker membership in the communist party is not a sure guarantee of
success . " we are not going to give red bloods the same privilege once
enjoyed by bluebloods, " says kadar . travel restrictions on u.s .
diplomats in budapest have been lifted, enabling them to go anywhere in
the country except to military zones . delicate negotiations are being
carried on with the vatican over the future of josef cardinal
mindszenty, who is still in asylum at the u.s . legation and whom the
government wants to leave the country . first signs of a rapport with
rome appeared when the government announced that it would approve pope
paul's assignment of six new catholic bishops to vacant hungarian sees
. but the government still refuses to let other bishops and some 1,000
priests perform their duties . off to belgrade . more than 90 per cent
of hungarian agriculture has been collectivized, but farmers can use
state machinery to cultivate their own tiny plots . increasingly, the
government is trying to channel a larger part of the economy into the
production of consumer goods . today some hungarian gypsies actually
have tv sets though they often go around barefoot . hungary, of course,
is still a totalitarian state . watchtowers, minefields and barbed-wire
seal off the country from the west . though the midnight knock by the
secret police is almost a thing of the past, more than 40,000 russian
troops and the hideous memory of 1956 still remain . kadar steadfastly
follows every new twist of kremlin policy . no sooner had nikita
khrushchev left yugoslavia after making his peace with marshal tito
than kadar made plans to visit belgrade this week, seeking to
strengthen hungary's economic, diplomatic and cultural ties with the
onetime " revisionist " bad boy of the satellites . never in hungary .
but kadar's liberalization does permit hungarians to laugh at
themselves and at their regime as long as communist ideology itself is
not attacked . in the latest issue of the hungarian satirical weekly
ludas matyi, the editors reflect on britain's recent $7,000,000 mail
train robbery and conclude that it could never have happened in hungary
. " we lack all the requirements for it, " said the magazine . " first,
of the 30 men in the gang, at least four would have been out sick,
eight would have gone by mistake to another railway embankment, and
three would have telegraphed from lake balaton that they could not come
for two days . it would also not have been possible to cover the green
track signal because we still have a cover shortage . in addition, a
mail train here would have been two hours late . the bandits loaded the
money they stole in a truck . they could do that in england, but here,
where the truck service stations are three months behind in their work,
what could they have loaded the bags on ? /
