south viet nam report on the war overshadowed
by the political and diplomatic turmoil in saigon, the all but
forgotten war against the viet cong continues on its ugly, bloody and
wearisome course . the drive against the communists has not diminished
in recent weeks ; in fact, it has intensified . fears that the
buddhist controversy might damage morale among vietnamese troops have
so far been groundless . if last week's battles were any criterion, the
government soldiers are fighting better than ever against a communist
foe that is exacting a hideous price in blood in the flooded paddies of
the south . the biggest government victory in months came last week
near the town of gocong, 45 miles south of saigon . in the dead of
night, 500 viet cong regulars swooped down on a strategic hamlet under
a screen of supporting fire from heavy machine guns and recoilless
rifles . desperately calling for help over their radio, the defenders
fought back doggedly, but were barely holding out when a government
infantry relief column arrived at dawn with 15 armored personnel
carriers . ambushed by the reds, the government reinforcements did not
panic, nosed their personnel carriers off the road and into the
paddies, heading directly for the dugin reds . from a graveyard at the
fringe of the battlefield, a viet cong heavy machine gun knocked out an
apc . but supported by government air force planes, which swept over
the red positions in screaming, shallow dives firing rockets and
dropping napalm, the reinforcements rolled straight onto the reds,
mashing scores of the communist troops into the stinking paddy mud with
their huge steel treads . at last the reds broke and ran, leaving
behind 83 dead . mutilated bodies . the episode made no sizable dent in
the viet cong army . but it was heartening to u.s . military observers,
who on many past occasions had watched the government's troops refuse
to press their attack . this time the relief column had stood its
ground under the viet cong pounding and then moved in on the reds in
brutal combat . two days later, the reds evened the score . this time
they hit the rice-rich camau peninsula, traditionally
communist-controlled territory where government enclaves are only
islands in a sea of viet cong . the plan was a clever two-pronged
attack against the two government-held cities of cai nuoc and damdoi,
which lie 15 miles apart on the southernmost tip of viet nam . to
confuse government reinforcements and to hamper their speedy arrival,
the viet cong first feinted at three neighboring outposts, sowed mines
on a major road over which government troops had to travel, and poured
harassing mortar fire on a u.s . helicopter airstrip in the area .
the military front seemed a million
miles from saigon last week . four weeks after the crackdown on south
viet nam's buddhist opposition, an atmosphere of watchful waiting hung
over the city . still fearful of a coup, the government stationed
secret police outside the homes of suspect officials ; top military
officers were ordered to sleep at military headquarters so that a check
could be kept on their whereabouts . with the buddhist opposition
lulled for the moment, saigon's student population feebly tried to
raise protests against the government . pelted with chairs and desks
thrown from classroom windows, government troops closed many of
saigon's schools, threw nearly 1,000 students into jail to cool off .
it seemed likely that viet cong agents inspired much of the
demonstrating . this made it all the more important for the u.s . and
president ngo dinh diem to settle their differences . the latest
episodes offered little assurance of that . couching his words in the
most careful diplomatic terms, u.s . ambassador henry cabot lodge last
week suggested to diem that his brother and fiery sister-in-law, ngo
dinh nhu and mme . nhu, leave the country until the current crisis was
over and a fresh rapprochement
shortly after midnight, the reds hit cai
nuoc directly . pouring mortar shells and recoilless rifle fire in the
perimeter system of defensive bunkers, the viet cong breached the front
gate of the city's major outpost, ran from bunker to bunker lobbing in
grenades and shooting the defenders in the back . the fight lasted for
only 35 minutes, but the reds occupied the town for the next 17 hours .
it was a bloodbath . when reinforcements finally appeared, they found a
heap of 50 mutilated bodies, including women and children, which the
reds had set afire . of the 100-man defending force, only 25 survived .
experts differ . soon thereafter, the reds overran the neighboring town
of damdoi . but this time the communists made the mistake of staying
too long . seven hours after the viet cong occupied the town,
government marines, airlifted to the scene in u.s . helicopters,
counterattacked . half the marine force blocked the reds' escape route
and attacked their sandbagged positions . armed helicopters unloaded
some 80 rockets into the communist defenses, and fighter planes zoomed
in at treetop level with guns blazing . when the reds finally
disappeared into the paddies after an all-day fight, they left behind
60 dead   between the government and the population established
. lodge hinted delicately that the continued presence of the bitterly
controversial nhus in south viet nam not only hampered the war effort
against the communist viet cong, but could also " endanger " u.s .
congressional appropriations to diem's government . diem expressed
surprise and shock at lodge's suggestion, coldly turned it down ; he
might have wondered how john f . kennedy would have felt if viet nam
had asked for the exile of bobby and ethel . what next in u.s . policy
? it was a time of frantic pondering and frantic discussion in
washington . some of the suggestions were ludicrous : cut off all aid
to diem (which would effectively hand the country to the communists) ;
run the seventh fleet up to the coast and force diem out of power (also
senseless, since no suitable successor was visible) . no one seemed to
be discussing perhaps the most sensible solution of all : stop all the
halfway hints of encouragement to promoters of a coup d'etat, and get
on with the difficult and unpalatable task of working with ngo dinh
diem and his family . faced with a profusion of proposals for action,
president kennedy was keeping his mind open . at his press conference,
he refused all efforts to drag him into a discussion
the government's
marines were also badly battered ; 48 were killed by the time the
shooting stopped . on the basis of bodies, this might be called a
government victory . not so insist some american military men who argue
that such defensive responses whatever the penalty in lives to the
communist enemy are wasting the strength of the vietnamese forces as
well as the $1,500,000 a day the u.s . is pumping into the country .
these experts will not be happy until the government can organize
regular " search and hold " operations in the southern rice country,
communism's stronghold . it is an incredibly difficult task . though
the viet cong are losing more men (currently about 500 a week) all the
time, there are more to be killed ,; officials in saigon now estimate
that hard-core communist strength has gone up from 23,000 to 31,000
over the past few months . but government strikes are at least more and
more frequent . in the first week of september, 55 separate offensive
ground actions of battalion strength or larger were under way, close to
an alltime record . conversely, red attacks also increased from 300 to
400 in the same period . as this week's operations illustrate, however,
many government troops have learned to stand and fight .
personalities and said simply : " what helps the war we support
; what interferes with the war effort we oppose . we are not there to
see a war lost . that is our policy . " as if to quiet u.s .
nervousness, diem at week's end announced that martial law, which has
been in effect for almost a month, will end this week, foreshadowing a
possible return to normalcy in south viet nam .
dragon lady, dragonfly in a blaze of flashbulbs, mme . ngo dinh
nhu left saigon last week on a trip to beirut, belgrade, and points
west . elaborately coiffed and gowned, she met reporters and defended
her views, attacked her enemies, dodged overly curved questions, and
displayed an incredibly fascinating feminine charm . whether twirling a
parasol or hiding shyly behind an ivory fan, she both attracted and
annoyed . " i had a strong desire to slap her, " said one french
television interviewer, " but from very, very close . " after the
lynching . mme . nhu's performance began at the saigon airport . she
said that when her mother cabled her from the u.s . urging her to flee
south viet nam with her children because their lives were in danger,
she had answered : " dear mother, i am sorry you have become
intoxicated . " to a question about her itinerary, she said : "
everyone calls me " the dragon lady.' for the next few weeks, i will be
like the dragonfly of the vietnamese song . when it's happy, it stays
; when it's unhappy, it flies away . " tentatively, mme . nhu said,
she planned to visit the u.s., though it would be like getting inside "
a lion's cage . " / i shall just talk extemporaneously, " she said . "
i am invited by the most important press groups . after lynching me,
more or less, now they wish to hear me . " she denied that she was
going to be south viet nam's observer at the united nations general
assembly . " i have nothing to do with the u.n., " she said . " i am
not even going there to visit, because i have already seen it . "
official consternation . at the interparliamentary union conference in
belgrade, where she represented south viet nam, mme . nhu stole the
show with her graceful pink aodai . there was fire in her eyes and in
her words . the diem government would never yield to " perfidious
blackmailing attacks, " she exclaimed . what about the concern for
south viet nam's buddhists voiced by the vatican ? pope paul vi is
too " easily worried, " retorted mme . nhu . her acid remark
supplemented earlier comments on the same subject on french television
: " as a catholic, i am only required to believe in the dogmas of my
religion and the pope . the pope is only infallible when he decrees
something ex cathedra . i do not believe that he will put himself in
his chair to disavow me, because that would be a very bad blow to
catholicism . " reports that she would not stay at the conference until
its conclusion left officials near consternation . " if mme . nhu
leaves one day early, d one, " then the conference will have lost its
importance . " but she showed every sign of enjoying herself . letting
fly at the white house after reports that john f . kennedy might be a
bit unhappy with south viet nam's whole ruling family, mme . nhu
suggested that the president was " misinformed about the situation in
south viet nam . " / he's a politician, and when he hears loud
opposition, he tries to appease it . " two days later she had lunch
with another delegate at the conference . it was none other than the
president's brother, senator edward m . kennedy . like others on the
u.s . delegation, teddy kennedy had halfway hoped to avoid the
confrontation . but they had a chat . a long chat . " she discussed at
length her side of the picture, " said teddy later . " she wanted to
talk to me . she wants to talk to anyone and everyone . " in fact,
declared an awed witness to the one-sided conversation, " she did not
stop talking from one minute to the other . " unable to get a word in
edgeways, teddy took notes .
it may have been this tart remark that partly prompted u.n .
secretary-general u thant to make some wholly gratuitous observations
at a manhattan press conference . conditions in saigon were " chaotic,
/ declared u thant, adding that " constitutional processes " are " a
feature which is completely absent in viet nam . " they are, of course,
completely absent in his own country, burma, which is ruled by general
ne win, as firm a dictator as exists in southeast asia but never
criticized by u thant .
