south viet nam birth at geneva at 10 : 42 a.m., peking
time, wednesday, july 21, 1954, the war in indo-china came to an end .
the result had been a foregone conclusion since the ignominious french
defeat by the communist viet minh at dienbienphu two months earlier .
even before that, diplomats from nine nations, halfway round the world
in geneva, had been working feverishly to hammer out the final peace
settlement . fearful that highlevel participation in geneva might put
the u.s . in the position of approving a sellout to the reds, president
eisenhower and secretary of state john foster dulles were hesitant
about endorsing the conference . but when french premier pierre
mendes-france said that he needed u.s . support to avoid unnecessary
concessions, washington sent under secretary of state walter bedell
smith back to geneva to stiffen him up . . (bullet here) in geneva,
diplomats argued over how indo-china should be partitioned . when
discussions appeared to be getting nowhere, mendesfrance imposed a
deadline after which he threatened to resign a move that would have
brought the conference to a grinding halt and continued a war that
could not be won . prodded by this ultimatum, the conference finally
agreed on terms that would partition viet nam at the 17th parallel .
the agreement gave the viet minh the industrial north, leaving the
government of ngo dinh diem with the rice-rich south . new military
bases were prohibited, and civilians were permitted to leave one zone
to take up residence in the other (nearly 800,000 north vietnamese
moved to the south, but only a few thousand southerners moved north) .
elections to unify viet nam were supposed to be held in 1956, but diem
repudiated this with the argument that any election in the communist
north would be rigged . the conference set up an international control
commission of india, poland and canada to investigate all border
violations and arbitrate all treaty disagreements ; but the i.c.c.'s
troika arrangement stymied whatever effectiveness it had . . (bullet
here) in january 1955, the u.s., at diem's request, took over the
primary responsibility for the training of the vietnamese army as part
of dulles' effort under the seato treaty to curb communist subversion
in southeast asia . though the u.s . poured in lavish economic aid, the
total u.s . military strength assigned to the military assistance group
did not exceed 2,000 men . but as the communist viet cong guerrillas
began increasing their terrorist attacks against the government, the
u.s . started to get seriously concerned . in october 1961, general
maxwell d . taylor visited south viet nam, came back with the outline
of a vastly stepped-up program of u.s . military aid . today, total u.s
. strength in south viet nam is about 14,000 men . the vietnamese army
is almost completely armed with u.s . weapons, and u.s . army
helicopters ferry government troops on practically every long-range
offensive mission .
