formosa little chiang when the united airlines jet
landed at washington airport last week, general chiang ching-kuo walked
unnoticed past the waiting reception committee of u.s . officials and
chinese diplomats . it was not until moments later that they spotted
him, a chunky man in a nondescript business suit, patiently examining
the modernistic interior of the dulles terminal building . the
committee's mistake, and the general's demeanor, were both significant
. though the eldest son of chiang kai-shek, nationalist china's
venerable president, chiang ching-kuo, 53, is the mystery man of
formosa who avoids the limelight . partly, the mystery has professional
reasons : as chief of formosa's secret police and head of the
guerrilla activities directed against red china, he naturally seeks the
shadows . formosan bestseller . the visit to the u.s., his first in
ten years,
is said to be without special significance . he conferred with
intelligence officials at both the cia and the pentagon, discussed the
latest estimates of conditions on the red chinese mainland . between
conferences, he squeezed in a one-day jet flight to cape canaveral . he
also had a 75-minute conference with the president and presented him
with a copy of profiles in courage in a chinese translation, adding
that it was a bestseller on formosa . kennedy and top u.s . officials
were seeing face to face the man who may well succeed his father as
president of nationalist china . on formosa, chingkuo is known as "
little chiang, " and his only major rival for the top job is vice
president chen cheng, who suffers from a liver ailment and has been in
semiretirement since june . born in chekiang province to the gimo's
first wife, a peasant girl who was later killed in a japanese bombing
raid, ching-kuo was 16 when the gimo sent him to moscow in 1925 " to
learn more about revolutionary ideas . " he joined the komsomol and
studied guerrilla tactics at a red army academy . when chiang kai-shek
broke with the communists in 1927, a letter over ching-kuo's name
appeared in pravda denouncing his father as a " traitor . " he says the
letter was a forgery . ching-kuo himself broke with stalin on the issue
of trotskyism and put in some years of hard work in gold mines and
factories . when the japanese threat forged a new bond between stalin
and the gimo in 1937, ching-kuo was permitted to leave for china with
his shy, appealing russian wife fanina and their son alan . spot & mop
. overjoyed at his son's return, the gimo nevertheless thought him too
russian in his outlook and had him tutored for two years to " make him
chinese again . " ever since, ching-kuo has loyally and efficiently
handled a succession of jobs for his father, ranging from operating a
concentration camp for communist suspects on green island to creating a
system of political commissars to check on loyalty in the army . under
ching-kuo, nationalist guerrillas probe the mainland for soft spots in
the defenses and public disaffection with the red regime . over the
past two years, some 1,500 men have been put ashore in chekiang and
kwangtung provinces . in u.s . opinion, individual saboteurs often
complete their missions, but most large raiding parties have been
quickly spotted and mopped up by the red chinese .
ching-kuo has repeatedly been accused of
engaging in secret talks with peking, presumably with the object of
making a deal after the gimo's death . those who know him best scoff at
the idea that he would ever hand formosa over to peking . sino-marxist
amalgam . with no formal university education, ching-kuo commands
little loyalty among nationalist china's intellectuals, and his
nonconformist methods irritate the top politicians of the kuomintang .
he is backed by his dashing half brother, major general chiang wei-kuo,
47 . as minister without portfolio in the cabinet and special adviser
to the president, chingkuo works closely with his father . another
source of strength is ching-kuo's 100,000-man youth corps, and his veto
power over promotions in the army gives him enormous influence with
junior officers . with his two older children married, ching-kuo lives
in a modest home in taipei with his wife and two younger sons . his day
begins at 6 : 00 a.m . with an hour's practice in chinese calligraphy
and painting, and continues in his office until midnight . he likes
hiking in the mountains, but since suffering from mild diabetes has had
to forgo convivial drinking mostly vodka . one old friend sees
ching-kuo as " an amalgam of the chinese tradition and marxist ideas .
/ what strikes most observers is his strange combination of shyness and
power . a chinese friend perhaps put it best when he said, " look at
his hands there's the man : coarse, tough,patient . " as his trip to
washington neared its end last week, the mystery man met newsmen, who
found him seated on a gold-embroidered sofa in the chinese embassy .
red china, said ching-kuo through his interpreter, is at its weakest
point in history and formosa correspondingly at its strongest . his
visit was intended to bring about " common understanding " between his
country and the u.s . did that mean there were misunderstandings ?
ching-kuo replied with a loud " no ! " even before the question was
translated . with a brisk, " that's all, " the interview was concluded,
and ching-kuo drove off to princeton, n.j., to enjoy the one u.s .
experience he had insisted upon staying at a motel .
