south africa a day at the stadiom one of the few ways that south
africa's hapless blacks and coloreds have to express their dismay at
apartheid it to boo vigorously the all-white home teams at
international sports contests . in 1955 the unpatriotic favoritism of
nonwhites at a rugby game with great britain at bloemfontein brought
about a racial slugfest that resulted in a tenyear ban on black and
colored spectators in that city ; five years ago, a similar clash
forced officials to halt a south africa-britain soccer match in
johannesburg's rand stadium . none of these feuds matched the battle
from which port elizabeth was recovering last week . there 50,000 white
fans were on hand to watch south africa's springboks face australia in
the final match of this year's rugger world series ; south africa,
which has held the championship for nearly 50 years, was behind two
games to one . this was quite all right with the crowd of 5,000
nonwhites, which inside its segregated enclosure felt no sympathy for
the locals . with the visitors ahead in this final match, the nonwhites
cheered so loudly that the puzzled australian players were taken aback
. then, with 18 minutes to play, south africa bounced back to tie the
score and the black bleachers exploded in a roar of anguish . nonwhites
began pouring over their fence onto the field, hurling bottles and
bricks . police with drawn clubs rushed them, joined by volunteer
whites . a white farmer emptied his pistol into the air . on the field,
south african forward dick putter was cut in the mouth by one missile,
and as a bottle spun toward referee piet myburgh, a husky australian
saved him with a flying tackle . after play resumed, south africa won,
22 to 6 . the score among the spectators : six whites and 20 nonwhites
hospitalized, two nonwhites arrested, 40 cars in the parking lot
damaged from rocks rained onto them from the black stands . possibly
hinting that nonwhites may be barred from all stadiums, foreign
minister eric louw thundered that " active measures are necessary to
prevent this sort of thing, " which, he complained, " is giving south
africa a bad name overseas . " as for port elizabeth, the authorities
there decided that the wise course would be to sell no more beverages
in bottles and to double the admission price for nonwhites at future
games .
