nigeria verdict in lagos it was shock enough to learn of the
conspiracy to overthrow the government of nigeria by violence, for
nigeria has been one of the most stable of africa's new nations . but
it seemed almost incredible that the ringleader could have been the
bespectacled chief prisoner in the dock of a lagos courtroom last week
the respected chief obafemi awolowo . educated by protestant
missionaries and still a nonsmoking teetotaler, awolowo worked his way
to a london university law degree, served five years as the solid,
efficient prime minister of his native western region and headed
nigeria's opposition party, the action group . before independence in
1960, he was influential in drawing up nigeria's constitution . would
awolowo, a masterful organizer, really get mixed up in a half-baked,
amateurish plot to wipe out his nation's top leadership with a handful
of explosives, arms, and rebels trained in nearby ghana ? winks from
the dock . indeed he would and did insisted nigeria's federal
prosecutor in the marathon, ten-month trial that filled 1,400 pages of
testimony . witness after witness 53 in all came into court to testify
that awolowo planned to topple federal prime minister sir abubakar
tafawa balewa last sept . 21 with the help of 200 trained men, on the
eve of a state visit by india's jawaharlal nehru . a government witness
testified that on awolowo's instructions he had carried a check to
purchase arms in ghana . police claimed that they had dug up four
cartridges hidden in awolowo's backyard . although conducted with grave
decorum, the trial had its interruptions . one prosecution witness
complained that some of the accused in the dock were giving him the
juju version of the evil eye a wink . awolowo, denying all the
accusations, said there was insufficient evidence to prove the case,
and declared that some of the testimony was obtained under duress . in
a half-hour closing oration, awolowo frankly lamented that " the
invaluable services which . . . i can still render will be lost to the
country . " the judge, george sowemimo, who was openly distressed by
the entire proceeding, said he had no choice but to convict . in a
nine-hour decision delivered last week, he gave awolowo ten years in
prison for treasonable felony, just a bit milder than the 15-year
prison term meted out to awolowo's crony, politico tony enahoro, a few
days earlier . headless opposition . with the convictions of awolowo
and enahoro, the opposition action group is virtually decapitated . but
the party still enjoys the loyal backing of western nigeria's
predominant, advanced yoruba tribe . the clannish yorubas will almost
certainly reorganize to challenge the north and east once more . at
week's end many a nigerian was wondering how long his country's
delicate balance of regional rivalries, which has been the key to
africa's most admired democracy, could last . unperturbed, sir abubakar
tafawa balewa, a moslem from the north, went ahead with plans to
convert nigeria on oct . 1 from a british dominion to a republic within
the british commonwealth .
sir abubakar will remain the real boss .
the changeover will merely install a
ceremonial president as head of state
to replace queen elizabeth, who is
now sovereign .
