americans abroad the magic word at first it seemed like
another in the long series of racial incidents in the armed forces . it
began one evening as a group of negro soldiers of the 557th
quartermaster company were returning to their barracks at the big u.s .
airbase at evreux, 62 miles west of paris . across the road lay another
barracks, housing the 317th supply squadron, where the airmen were
winding up a " g.i . party, " that is, a cleanup before next morning's
inspection . death at dawn . the negroes passing by were noisy, and
someone shouted at them from a second-story window of the supply
squadron barracks . no one knows who did the shouting . no one agrees
on what was shouted . but unquestionably, the shouts contained what
negro soldiers at evreux call " the magic word " nigger . rushing into
their own barracks, the negroes grabbed 12in . metal rods used to
transform beds into bunks and raced across the street . first there was
much pushing, shouting and loud argument . then a fight broke out,
lasting approximately 30 seconds . when it was over, six white airmen
were hospitalized with head wounds . none of the injuries seemed
serious, but at dawn airman first class robert padgett, 23, of
woodlawn, va., died of a brain hemorrhage . next morning the
quartermaster company was lined up, and the surviving injured airmen
picked out their assailants, who were all pfcs : richard parker of
eckman, w . va., edward spears of new york city, raymond bost of
pittsburgh, franklin waddell and robert burrell of philadelphia . the
arrested men were negroes, the injured and the dead whites . even so,
there was a debate at evreux as to whether or not the fatal brawl was
indeed a race riot . gung-ho look . both units are completely
integrated and in the same proportion about 17 per cent negro . and
there were grounds for grievances other than racial . the quartermaster
company, the only army unit on the base, must submit to a midnight bed
check, while airmen have only to report for duty each morning . as an
airborne unit, the quartermaster company keeps in rugged physical
shape, has the tough look of gung-ho soldiers . the men of the supply
unit have the look of office workers and the vanity of intellectuals .
one airman sneered, " you could take that whole army company across the
road and add up their iqs and you wouldn't get 200 . " at week's end
even more doubt was cast on the racial implications of the fight when a
sixth member of the quartermaster company was arrested and also charged
with homicide and aggravated assault . he was a white man, pfc allen
gernard, 18, of new york city, who presumably had grabbed a piece of
pipe and joined his negro buddies in the attack on the airmen .
