malaysia hurray for harry when pretty catherine loh was elected
miss malaysia last april, the pert beauty from the oil-rich british
protectorate of brunei fully expected to preside over the independence
ceremonies of the newly formed federation of malaysia . but that was
before brunei withdrew from the planned federation in a state of pique,
leaving malaya, singapore, sarawak and north borneo to go it alone .
brunei's defection not only left this week's joyous celebrations
without a beauty queen but it also took malaysia out of the running for
the miss universe contest . the beauty queen flap was low on the list
of last-minute labor pains attending the long-awaited birth of malaysia
. at the insistence of indonesia's belligerent president sukarno, who
bitterly opposes the federation, malaysia's independence had been
postponed two weeks beyond the original aug . 31 starting date, while a
united nations team investigated whether or not north borneo and
sarawak really wanted to join . hoping to influence opinion against
federation, sukarno began moving paratroopers into indonesian borneo
along his 900-mile-long border with the two territories . some
indonesian guerrillas even sneaked through the jungles into sarawak to
stir up trouble ; they were relentlessly hunted down by tough little
british army gurkhas, aided by halfnaked iban tribesmen, who hung up at
least one indonesian head in the rafters of their longhouses . fearful
that indonesia might extract further delays out of malaya's easygoing
prime minister tunku abdul rahman, the architect of the federation,
singapore's brilliant, shifty prime minister lee kuan yew, who regards
sukarno as " an international blackmailer, " swung into action . flying
to sarawak and north borneo, " harry " lee picked up the chief
ministers of both territories and brought them back to kuala lumpur to
stiffen up the tunku . britain's commonwealth secretary duncan sandys
was also on hand, working hard to get agreement . threatening to
declare singapore an independent state, lee pressured abdul rahman into
holding firm for the federation's sept . 16 deadline . last week the
final obstacle to independence was cleared away when the u.n.'s
malaysia team reported that both north borneo and sarawak favored the
federation . as the new nation prepared to unfurl its
red-and-white-striped flag, harry lee was quick to capitalize on the
occasion . with his popularity at its zenith for his major role in
bringing the federation about, he scheduled immediate elections in
singapore .
