abruptly, at 9 : 45 p.m., the barrage began first against the
palace guard barracks, where a mortar and artillery attack went on for
hours . when it came time for the big push on the palace itself, there
was a danger that vietnamese and american families who lived in an
adjacent residential neighborhood would be hit by shells . so, well
after midnight, a force of 18 tanks supported by armored cars and 600
foot soldiers went through a complicated maneuver that brought them
circuitously to the palace grounds . at 4 a.m., from several side
streets, the attacking columns began pouring point-blank fire from
tanks, cannons, machine guns and rifles at the protective walls . back
came a murderous counterfire, everything diem's defenders had left .
first one diem tank caught fire and exploded in a tower of smoke and
flame . then another was knocked out of action . two of the rebels'
tanks were also destroyed . a chorus of cheers . with huge holes now
gaping in the fences, and the defenders scattering inside the grounds,
the way was clear for the final push . then suddenly, at 6 : 15 a.m.,
everything fell silent again . a rebel general, who throughout the
battle had been in constant touch with diem and nhu by telephone, had
called for a five-minute grace period to allow the besieged president
and his party to emerge . but no one came out, and the cannon firing
resumed, smashing windows, splintering doors, knocking chunks off the
palace walls . the riflemen, bellyflat on the ground, sniped happily at
diem's last-ditch supporters . the battle was clearly over, and 17
minutes later, by dawn's first light, reported time correspondent
murray gart, " i could see a white flag being waved from a first-floor
window on the palace's southwest corner . but there was more shooting
from the palace . then the white flag waved again and firing stopped .
at first cautiously, then freely, the camouflage-suited rebels began to
stand up, and a chorus of cheers welled up from the streets .
western-style, they fired their guns in the air, and rushed into the
sieved fortress . " after all their effort, the rebel soldiers decided
that a little looting was in order . merrily, they ran from room to
room, ripping down curtains for souvenirs, grabbing pieces of china .
one soldier grabbed a calendar that bore diem's picture, stuffed it in
his shirt . another made off with a two-foot japanese doll that he
hugged fondly to his breast .
the official story . forgotten for the moment were diem and
nhu . a few hours later, the ugly facts began to emerge . first, there
was the official story . a spokesman for the military junta announced
that the pair had slipped out of rebel hands during the cease-fire,
boarded a departing truck while wounded were being removed, and somehow
reached a catholic church in the chinese quarter of suburban cholon .
there, according to the story, both killed themselves at 10 : 45 a.m .
it would have been an incredible end for such devout adherents of roman
catholicism, which sternly condemns suicide . but, in fact, the
president and his brother were obviously murdered . according to one
version, diem and nhu, should have been sent abroad by plane ; but,
instead, they escaped from the palace, were found n the cholon church
by a troop of soldiers who arrested the pair and drove them off in an
armored car toward military headquarters . on the way, an order was
given to kill them . when the armored car arrived at headquarters, both
men were dead . " unofficial " photographs showed diem's bullet-riddled
body lying next to a personnel carrier, with a soldier leaning over him
. a picture of nhu showed him on a stretcher, his body marked by
bruises . according to the same report, he had been stabbed to death .
again the accusing voice of mme . nhu was heard from los angeles : "
any crime committed against the ngo family cannot be hidden under the
label of suicide . i affirm that suicide has always been considered
incompatible with our religion . " she also worried over the fate of
her three young children, 4, 11 and 15, but reports from saigon
suggested that they were safe . she added amid sobs : " if really my
family has been treacherously killed with either the official or
unofficial blessing of the american government, i can predict to you
all that the story in south viet nam is only at its beginning . " the
trung sisters . the reports of diem's murder that swept through saigon
left a cold chill among even the bitterest of his enemies . but for a
while nothing could cool the exultant crowds in saigon . buddhist
monks, quickly released from jail by the revolutionary regime, joined
the throngs . shouting students turned the town on end . the mob
smashed bookstores that had been owned by diem's brother, bishop ngo
dinh thuc, and by madame nhu . another crowd toppled and broke up the
statue of viet nam's reverend trung sisters, stalwart vietnamese
heroines who fought chinese overlords in the 1st century a.d . ; their
monument had been sponsored by madame nhu . at the national assembly, a
shouting anti-diem crowd sacked the hall . then carried diem's portrait
onto the front steps and shredded it . at first, the soldiers of the
military junta let the excitement run its course, then troops nudged
the
mobs off main thoroughfares, urging them to quiet down . they obviously
had orders from the nation's new boss,duong van minh, to avoid the kind
of tough measures that might make enemies for his regime .
oriental gulliver . eight years ago, general
duong van minh made a triumphal entry into saigon to the cheers of his
countrymen . minh's troops had hunted down the last guerrilla forces of
the dreaded binh xuyen bandits, a sort of oriental cosa nostra that
pillaged the countryside and controlled vice in saigon . sometimes it
was known as " the whorehouse sect . " so moved was president ngo dinh
diem by minh's victory that he kissed his general on both cheeks . if
sheer heft could help him run south viet nam, big minh would have no
problem . a gulliver among his country's lilliputians, he stands just
under 6 ft . and weighs around 200 lbs., has a pronounced slouch caused
from constantly having to stoop over to hear his countrymen . american
military advisers nicknamed him big to distinguish him from a
smaller-statured fellow officer who is not related to him, lieut .
general tran van ( " little " ) minh . vietnamese good-naturedly call
minh " beo, " or fat boy . prison to prison . born in mytho, 35 miles
southwest of saigon, minh graduated from a lycee run by the french, in
1940 enlisted in the french colonial army and was commissioned a 2nd
lieutenant . he spent most of world war ii serving under a vichy
colonial administration that did the bidding of the japanese invaders .
but in march 1945, when vichy surrendered the french colony to the
japanese outright, minh joined a band of defiant, lower-echelon
soldiers who organized heroic but futile resistance to the capitulation
. minh was taken prisoner by the japanese, beaten and tortured by
having most of his teeth yanked out . minh is proud of his dental scars
and today, when he neglects to wear his false-tooth plate, he smiles
just the same, uninhibitedly showing off his half-empty mouth .
released by the japanese after two months, minh duly reported back to
the french only to be jailed for his insurrection . he and several
other prisoners were put in a crowded, reeking cell with neither light
nor toilet, ankledeep in human excrement . minh " almost went crazy, "
was freed after three months, thanks to a fellow prisoner who was
released before minh and intervened on his behalf with the french
commandant . the friend : nguyen ngoc tho, diem's vice president and
the military junta's choice last week for premier . although minh is
universally deemed anti-communist and pro-west, the experience in jail
heightened his nationalism . however, after his release, he accepted a
promotion to 1st lieutenant in the french forces, spent four years
attached to the puppet regime of emperor bao dai .
in 1952, with independence only two years away, minh
transferred to the newly formed vietnamese army with the grade of major
. after a stint of advanced study at paris' general staff school, he
returned and, following diem's installation in 1955, launched his
guerrilla-style campaign against the binh xuyen bandits . he also
helped diem in his campaign to subdue two fanatic, rebellious religious
sects, the hoa hao and cao dai . after a second training tour abroad
this one at the u.s . army command and general staff college at fort
leavenworth, where he picked up serviceable english minh in 1958 was
chosen by diem to be the first boss of a field operations command to
coordinate the mounting war against communist viet cong guerrillas .
generals without commands . like many of his brother officers, minh was
to become disenchanted with the president's rule, which often cut
humiliating through their chains of command . once, without
so much as advising the area commander, the
president's brother, ngo dinh nhu, ordered an entire battalion
transferred 80 miles from cantho to saigon . minh protested privately
: " generals do not have power of command, therefore i do not command
. " he was also concerned about lack of popular support in the war
against the viet cong, but he took no part in the abortive 1960 coup .
in the end, however, minh suffered for his views, which ultimately
reached the palace . last year, even though minh was being pushed
vigorously by general paul d . harkins, his field operations command
was abolished, and minh was assigned as " military adviser " to the
president a meaningless post in which he was under diem's surveillance
talk with the pentagon . the downgrading failed
to diminish u.s . enthusiasm for minh, who impressed them not only in
military ability . he is one of his country's top all-round athletes,
excels at tennis, soccer, swimming and boating . minh used to delight
in running his 16-ft . motorboat up and down the saigon river by means
of a remotecontrol steering system, terrorizing all other river traffic
. one day, a few years ago, minh was matched against visiting general
maxwell taylor in a set of tennis doubles and later exulted : " we
whipped the hell out of them . " in the angry aftermath of last
august's " special forces " raids on buddhist pagodas, eyes fell on
minh as a man who might lead a coup . knowing that he was suspect, minh
took care not to implicate himself ; as recently as two weeks ago, he
showed up with diem at a palace ceremony . but within the past month,
minh participated in an afternoon's talk with a visiting pentagon
official in which the possibilities of a coup were discussed . the fat
boy suggested that he was not the man to lead it, if it came, because
he considers himself a weak administrator . minh evidently found his
administrator in aristocratic, french-educated lieut . general tran van
don, 46, acting chief of the joint general staff, co-leader of the
coup, and the sharpest staff officer in south viet nam . says one u.s .
officer of minh : " he is a very nice man and very tough, but general
don is more capable . " big minh may lack the political talent to
become the leader his country needs, but he has several important
factors going for him . for one thing, he is a career infantryman with
a bulldog face and a top sergeant's bluntness, yet is popular in the
ranks . next, he is clean of corruption or a pro-communist past .
finally, big minh is popular among civilians . he drinks so little that
one joke has it that a quart of whisky would last him a year . he is
married to a pretty vietnamese wife, has three children . he is a
buddhist who eschews fanaticism . said one vietnamese last week : "
everyone knows general minh . he fought the whorehouse sect . he is a
good man . /
