italy " this ship is leaking " italian
democracy last week was staggering toward a political crisis that may
well prove to be the worst since the communists were narrowly defeated
15 years ago . on the verge of entering the government was a marxist
party that, at its worst, is openly allied with the communists and, at
best, is only a lukewarm and neutrality-minded adherent of the west .
seeking permission . when the original apertura a sinistra (opening to
the left) was engineered a little less than two years ago, it happened
largely because the long-ruling christian democrats felt themselves
slipping at the polls and generally declining in vigor compared to
their early postwar days . the solution advanced by left-wing christian
democrats, with the zealous backing of washington, was a series of
reforms in education, agriculture and taxation, all involving large
measures of government planning . since this program was opposed by the
rightist parties in parliament, including the free-enterprising
liberals, the christian democrats needed support elsewhere to be able
to form a majority . they sought it from pietro nenni's left-wing
socialists . according to the apertura agreement, the nenni socialists
did not enter the government but supported it in parliament . in the
process, some christian democrats hoped, the nenni socialists would be
wooed into breaking their longstanding alliance with the communists .
as it turned out, the apertura failed to accomplish that or anything
else except the unnecessary nationalization of italy's electrical
industry .
it also paved the way, at last spring's elections, for heavy gains by
both the communists and the liberals . since then italy has been ruled
by the caretaker government of premier giovanni leone . but both pietro
nenni and the majority of the christian democrats under aldo moro
wanted to revive the apertura, this time with the left-wing socialists
actually in the government . last week, pietro nenni turned to his
deeply divided party to get its permission to negotiate such a deal .
outside rome's massive marble palace of the congresses, 600 socialist
delegates parked their fiats, looking for all the world like bourgeois
conventioneers . but inside, suggesting that you can't teach old
dogmatists new tricks, the stage was bedecked with red flags and the
socialist emblem : a hammer, sickle and a rising sun . eyes grew misty
with tears as the affluent crowd broke out in emotional renditions of
the internationale and bandiera rossa (red flag) . spouting jargon .
today, said pietro nenni frankly, " socialist participation in a
coalition government is not a question of principle but of political
opportunity . " then he launched into a precarious balancing act . he
denounced the communists' " arid theories of power, " and urged the
party to drop its rule demanding cooperation with the reds in local
elections . but he did not as the christian democrats had wanted him to
ask that such electoral alliances be specifically ruled out . in
foreign affairs, nenni advocated a vague policy of " positive
neutralism, " which means unenthusiastic adherence to nato and
opposition to the u.s . plan for a multinational surface fleet equipped
with polaris missiles .
the powerful pro-communist wing of
nenni's socialists denounced the proposed coalition government as "
unacceptable to a working-class party . " the balance of power rested
with the socialists' no . 2 leader, riccardo lombardi, who only joined
the party in 1947 (before then he was a leader of the leftist action
party, which died in 1946) and feverishly tries to make up for lost
time by spouting archaic marxist jargon . he also made neutralist
noises, and unlike nenni, he hinted at further nationalization schemes
. still, while he denounced the " menace of capitalism, " lombardi
admitted that within a decade the capitalists might solve italy's
social and economic problems so the socialists had better get into the
government now to share
the credit and influence events . thus, in the end, lombardi threw his
support to nenni, but with so many qualifications that nenni might yet
find it impossible to work out a coalition with the christian democrats
. of 101 seats in the party's central committee, two went to
independents, 49 to procommunists and 59 to delegates favoring the
coalition . of these 59, however, 16 are held by lombardi supporters .
viewing his shaky victory, the aging (72), ailing nenni declared : "
this ship is leaking on all sides . " more moderate ? right-wing
christian democrats, who had opposed the apertura in the first place,
warned direly against taking the socialists on board at all . said
liberal leader giovanni malagodi : " collaboration with the socialists
signifies the abandonment of the struggle against communism,
abandonment of solidarity with the west, abandonment of a free economy
and an open democratic society . " u.s . policymakers, although they no
longer support the apertura with the same old enthusiasm, perceive no
such perils ; they argue that nenni & co . would become more moderate
as members of the government than if they remained on the outside
looking in . besides, insist defenders of the apertura, the alternative
to a center-left alliance is a center-right coalition which could not
command a majority in the present parliament without the votes of
monarchists and neo-fascists . many italian right-wingers actually want
the apertura government formed, hoping that it will fail, thereby
forcing new elections in which the right-wing parties expect to make
further gains for comrade palmiro togliatti, he chided nenni for his
anti-communist talk and sweetly urged both the socialists and the
left-wing christian democrats to accept cooperation with the communist
party .
