dahomey        sounds in the night leaping from his bed one night last
january, dahomey's president hubert maga excitedly telephoned military
headquarters to report that his residence was being shelled . he soon
went back to sleep . as it turned out, the tough, jolly, former
schoolteacher had been aroused by the clatter of windblown coconuts
pelting down on the mansion's tin roof . last week the sounds in the
night came from real gunfire as angry mobs swept through the former
french west africa colony, located between togo and nigeria on the gulf
of guinea . in cotonou, the capital, and nearby portonovo, the ragged
crowds carried blackdraped coffins and chanted war songs as they
ransacked government offices, burned cars, hauled down the green,
yellow and red national flag from public buildings, and demanded maga's
ouster . bariba tribesmen from maga's native northern region leaped
into the fray in his defense and killed two demonstrators with bows and
arrows . finally the president resigned in favor of colonel christophe
soglo, commander of dahomey's 800-man army, who became head of state
and promptly suspended the constitution .
squandermania . it was
the latest in a series of coups that have shaken africa's new nations,
including dahomey's neighbor, togo, where president sylvanus olympio
was assassinated last january, and the former french congo, whose
president fulbert youlou was deposed in august (the ex-belgian congo
also witnessed a near-coup three weeks ago) . plots have been uncovered
in senegal, chad and the ivory coast .
the sources of trouble
are essentially the same in all the countries involved : moribund
economies, vast numbers of unemployed, strong and hostile labor unions
. in dahomey (pop . 2,200,000), the situation is aggravated by the fact
that it once supplied civil servants for many other french colonies and
boasted that " brains are our biggest export " ; now it has an
increasingly serious white-collar unemployment problem, for newly
independent west african nations trained their own government officials
. the dahomey rioters also denounced president maga's " squandermania,
/ notably the magnificent palace he built himself for $3,000,000 . on
the warpath . colonel soglo, 54, who has spent most of his adult years
as a professional soldier in the french army, included his friend maga
in the interim government as foreign minister . he is trying hard to
balance his government between the unions, which still howl for maga's
complete removal, and the northern bariba tribesmen, who are on the
warpath to win maga's complete reinstatement . though massive french
aid helped the new nations in the area to achieve a measure of economic
progress and political stability, dahomey and the other french colonies
are now threatened with tribal and sectional wars that could spread
disorder through much of west africa .
