great britain home in the highlands for the highland villagers
of perthshire, britain's prime minister last week put on the liveliest
show since bonnie prince charlie battled through their misty glens in
1745 . in dalguise and dunkeld, amulree and buchanty, and scores of
other grey hamlets and market towns, sir alec douglas-home shook hands
with shepherds and shopkeepers, downed a wee drappie with farmers,
popped into cottages, schools and smithies . the prime minister even
took a noble pratfall in the mud as he was scrambling up a haycart to
address the folk in sleepy dunning . " well, " he grinned, getting to
his feet, " it's better to fall now than later . " on the stump,
douglas-home seemed relaxed and slip-proof . to win election to
parliament from the safe tory seat, he raced through the glens in a
fast black humber, making dozens of plain-spoken speeches on topics
ranging from winter grain prices to east-west relations . wearing a
battered tweed jacket and a jauntily angled checked-cloth cap, he
fielded involved local questions with a barrage of statistics that
showed he had done his homework in the hillside cottage near comrie
that became the official seat of government during the campaign . when
heckling stirred an uproar in the crowd he was addressing at aberfeldy,
the prime minister calmly sat down in midspeech, refusing to let party
stewards throw out the interrupters . said he : " they are harmless
people . " as douglas-home put it, " the eyes of the world " last week
were on rural perthshire ; but tories' eyes were focused on a far more
critical by-election this week in luton, an automotive center 30 miles
from london where experts detect a swing to labor after 13 years of
tory majorities . as luton goes, said the pundits, so may most other
industrial areas where labor has traditionally been strongest .
speaking more to luton's floating voter than the faithful in perth, the
prime minister used every crossroads stopover last week to inveigh
against the labor party's " card-index, button-pushing society . " with
a socialist government, said he, " we would be like puppets on long
strings of red tape, with the strings pulled in whitehall . " to his
listeners' delight, the prime minister invariably added : " as a
scotsman, i never think whitehall knows best . /
