europe the wayward buss in communist east
europe, commissars and cops do it . in rome and madrid, moppets in
dancing class do it . frenchmen perform the ritual with sinuous grace,
spaniards smackingly, germans with a click of the heels . however
widely their techniques may vary, europeans from barcelona to bialystok
in recent years have taken to hand kissing with fervor and frequency
unmatched in their history . after world war ii, the custom seemed in
decline . but today, men of virtually every class and calling on the
continent dive for distaff knuckles as assiduously, if not always so
expertly, as do the courtiers in a lehar operetta . telegraphed
admiration . traditionalists deplore the trend and complain that it has
vulgarized a stylish, patrician ritual . in the old days, no well-bred
european kissed a woman's hand before noon, or outdoors (except at
garden parties or the race track), or if she wore gloves and not at
all, in most countries, if she was unmarried . nowadays, even in
strait-laced spain, girls who are barely old enough to hold up a
strapless bra have their hands out . when it is enclosed in a glove,
uninhibited males blithely peel it off or smooch the wrist instead .
and now that the hand kiss has become democratic, it is bestowed
alfresco, any time, any place, even when the recipient is on horseback
or in church . notwithstanding the celebrated advice of lorelei lee ( "
a kiss on the hand may be quite continental, but diamonds are a girl's
best friend " ), most european women welcome the new wave of hand
kissing, and to their men it has always seemed a more intriguing
approach to a woman than the aseptic anglo-saxon handshake . as a
viennese satirist wrote in 1825 : to take your hand for
a kiss is merely to ask this : will the mouth of the miss permit
further bliss ? to speed the answer, ardent latins, in
particular, sometimes telegraph their admiration for an attractive
woman by squeezing her fingers or locking on to them with both hands
all, cracks italian moviemaker vittorio de sica : " you've got to
start somewhere . " capitalist hangover . hand kissing got its start in
europe with the roman emperors, who exported the gesture as a symbolic
act of fealty . in central europe it ceased to be a pledge of loyalty
to the sovereign in the late 18th century, when austrian emperor joseph
ii snatched his hand from subjects' lips with the cry : " it isn't
there for someone to wipe his nose on ! " more recently mussolini,
who frowned on the custom in any form, tried to discourage il baciamano
. he might as well have tried to suppress spaghetti . the nazis also
deplored the handkuss good germans were meant to give the hitler salute
instead but der fuhrer himself was often photographed with his forelock
fanning some actress's paw . in eastern europe after world war ii, the
communists denounced the practice as a " capitalist hangover, " but
they soon despaired of curing it . after hungarian males, who have been
known to feast on a pretty finger for seeming minutes in a diplomatic
receiving line, poland boasts the iron curtain's most insatiable hand
kissers ; warsaw policemen routinely kiss policewomen's hands, and
have even been known to buss a comely speeder after handing her a
ticket . italy's communist boss palmiro togliatti is an accomplished
finger-smoocher . as for russia, tselovat ruku was outlawed by the
commissariat of hygiene in 1924, but today it is considered so kulturny
that an announcer who recently nuzzled a french actress's hand on
soviet television did not even raise pravda's temperature .
