cold war nikita & the capitalists he called
them " gentlemen capitalists, " and only occasionally suggested that
all capitalists are really robbers and cheats . communist delegations
from all over the world crowded into moscow for the 46th anniversary
celebrations of the bolshevik revolution . but nikita khrushchev
devoted a total of seven hours to a traveling group of 20 top american
executives (plus one educator) as if he found more challenge in their
company . on a european tour sponsored by time, the visitors first
called on k . at the kremlin . in the oval room, where the soviet
council of ministers usually meets, the callers sat in rows of small
desks while he answered questions from behind a huge barricade of a
table . he asked them to drop in at his anniversary reception the
following day, and they in turn asked him to a party of their own (he
promptly accepted) . throughout, khrushchev put on one of those
marathon propaganda performances at which he is by turns hearty,
earthy, funny, menacing, seemingly frank, and totally impervious to
argument . he sounded his usual note of ritualistic optimism, vowed
that in seven years no more and no less russia will overtake the u.s .
economically . to henry r . roberts, president of connecticut general
life, " he acted like a corporation president who is in trouble with
his board of directors and is trying to get out of his dilemma by
making aggressive and boastful statements . " murder at the wall .
apart from claiming victory in last week's berlin incident and
deploring the difficulties on the wheat deal (see the nation),
khrushchev suggested that russia had not really given up on the moon
race, at least not for the long run, and he almost teasingly hinted
that the sino-soviet split might be mended one of these days : " the
more you rejoice about the differences, the greater your disappointment
will be . " again and again he made a pitch for trade with the u.s.,
repeatedly pointed out that the u.s.'s allies trade far more heavily
with russia than the u.s . itself . actually, as these businessmen well
knew, russia has few gold reserves to pay for u.s . products and little
in the way of exportable goods that might interest the u.s . when
national cash register president robert s . oelman asked what products
russia could offer, khrushchev cited u.s . trade in machine tools with
west germany . " if we have managed to build a rocket no worse than
anything you have in the u.s., then i am sure we will be able to build
machine tools in no way inferior to anything the west germans can build
. " moving from foreign trade to foreign relations, khrushchev pulled
out all the " peaceful coexistence " cliches, lost his aplomb (but not
his temper) only when chauncey w . cook, president of general foods,
asked " why is it necessary to build a berlin wall and shoot people
down if they try to get over ? " / a state frontier is a state
frontier, " khrushchev replied . " and every state, whenever its
borders are violated, shoots the violators . " / not to keep people in,
we don't, " snapped cook . " in your country, children are killed in a
church for the sole reason that their color is different, " k . snapped
back . before anyone could make the obvious retort that murder at the
wall, unlike murder in birmingham, is an act of the government
khrushchev was off on something else
a new way to cheat . loosening up as
it progressed, the interview closed in an exchange of banter, with
khrushchev maintaining that capitalists controlled the u.s . government
. " who was mcnamara before he became secretary of defense ? " asked
nikita . " he was president of ford motor, " answered g . keith
funston, president of the new york stock exchange . " he's one out of
ten in the cabinet . why not talk about the others ? " / what was the
occupation of your former commander in germany ? " demanded k . "
general clay is now with lehman brothers, " said avco board chairman
kendrick r . wilson jr . " he's an army officer who made good, " added
funston . khrushchev raised a pious eyebrow : " you have 190 million
people . why don't they all make good ? certainly they have not
trespassed against god . " to wilson's assertion that the american
people, through the stock market, own much of u.s . business,
khrushchev laughed . " capitalists are very astute to have thought that
up, " he said . " it's a new way to cheat people . " he went on to
describe the " parasitic " state of capitalism, where the coupon
clipper " can live a life of luxury, drinking, carousing, or changing
wives, " then eased off . " i'm your host here, " he concluded, " so
please don't put me in the position of going into each individual here
and asking where he directs his activities and so forth, how many wives
he has . one of your fellow capitalists rockefeller is losing in
prestige because of that . " a sense of frustration . next day, the
jovial mood changed . at the traditional red square parade celebrating
the anniversary of the revolution, the russians displayed a squadron of
finned, 50-ft.-long rockets, which they insisted were anti-missile
missiles (the birds looked more like beefed-up versions of the soviet
sa-2 antiaircraft missile, and western observers thought that at most
they could be the equivalent of the u.s . army's nike zeus) . at the
kremlin reception later, khrushchev's toasts were so heartily
anti-western that u.s . ambassador foy kohler finally asked : " where
is the spirit of moscow ? i haven't heard any toasts i could drink to
. " but that evening, walking into the businessmen's reception at the
hotel sovietskaya (which had been refurbished and restaffed for the
visitors), he again was at his most amiable . sitting at a table,
oblivious to the massed diplomats and newsmen who were crowding in to
listen, khrushchev sipped " three-star " armenian brandy as, one by
one, the americans were guided over to talk to him . like the master
politician he is, k . remembered names, faces and business specialties
from the day before, even told a pretty secretary : " you wore a brown
dress yesterday . " he jokingly hit up rudolph peterson, president of
california's bank of america, for a $10 billion loan, with eugene
beesley, president of eli lilly & co., khrushchev continued a
discussion of possible u.s.-soviet exchanges in medical research, and
when he was reminded that a team of four u.s . doctors is in russia now
doing just that, nikita nodded . " good, " he said, " and let's give
them a laxative if they do badly . " he eagerly discussed
food-processing techniques with general foods' cook,
magneto-hydrodynamics with avco's wilson, and liquor with seagram's
edgar m . bronfman ( " our vodka is better than your vodka " ) . when
stock exchange president funston turned up at the table, nikita
khrushchev chanted, in english : " wall street ! wall street ! "
he seemed to regard the businessmen as doers like himself, and once
took a left-handed dig at communist inefficiency : " capitalists know
what is profitable ; capitalists are not soviet bureaucrats . " often
khrushchev returned to his theme of trade : " remember, please, that
you can always make a profit dealing with us . " but the question
remained : a profit for whom ? wall street's funston, for one,
concluded that the u.s . should not trade with russia, should do
nothing to make life easier for them . said he, in west berlin : " i
went away with a sense of frustration . how do you deal with people who
lie to you and to whom facts mean nothing .
