great britain the loss of luton the booming automobile-making
town of luton, tory party chairman john hare declared recently, is " a
microcosm of the britain we are building . " if so, it may be the
socialists who will take over the construction job . at a by-election
last week in luton, 30 miles northwest of london, voters elected a
labor m.p . for the first time in 13 years, turning the tories' 1959
majority of 5,000 votes into a thumping 3,749-vote margin for labor .
the switch, pronounced labor party leader harold wilson triumphantly,
was clear proof that " the conservative government has totally lost the
confidence of the country . " next day the tories had one to talk
about, when ballots were at last counted after another by-election in
the sprawling scottish constituency of kinross and west perthshire .
there, in one of britain's safest tory seats, tory prime minister lord
home now plain sir alec douglas-home won a seat in the house of commons
. his 9,328-vote margin exceeded his party's most buoyant expectations
. what's more, in the course of 72 speeches and a hectic eleven-day
campaign, the former peer proved that he is a vigorous, toughminded
politician who seems wellequipped to hold his own in parliamentary
free-for-all . he will have to . in the kind of marginal seat that
matters most, like luton, tories are faring badly . what troubles the
tories is that luton is a sign of tory affluence, with industrial
payrolls that have boosted wage levels 20 per cent above the national
average . luton has a bigger-than-average share of the fastgrowing
middle class that has kept the conservatives in office for twelve years
. labor candidate will howie, 39, a neat, bespectacled civil engineer,
won out over tory sir john fletcher-cooke, 52, a tweedy, mustached
former colonial administrator, by promising luton the new schools,
housing and industrial expansion that labor is pragmatically building
its election hopes around . before returning to london for parliament's
reopening this week, douglashome, the new m.p . for kinross, remained
professionally optimistic : " luton was the last page of the old
chapter . kinross is the first page of the new . /
