south viet nam : the new regime for a while, saigon looked
like a city liberated . vietnamese g.i.s guarding public buildings
munched oranges, bananas and candy, showered on them by civilians
grateful for the overthrow of the regime . pretty girls embraced
soldiers, draped tank turrets with garlands, scrambled squealing aboard
army jeeps . with the lifting of a temporary curfew and mme . nhu's ban
on dancing, saigon's long-repressed night life flowered as never before
. in bars and cabarets, the b-girls shucked the white, hospital-like
smocks they had been forced to wear under the morality laws, wriggled
back into their traditional slit skirts, or into u.s.-style slacks, to
twist and tango with viet and american soldiers into the small hours .
shops reopened, repairmen restrung power lines blown down by battle,
and saffron-robed buddhist monks emerged from jail or hiding (among
them : top buddhist thich tri quang, who had sought asylum ten weeks
ago in the u.s . embassy) . at xa loi pagoda, principal scene of last
august's government crackdown, thousands prayed . from poulo condore
prison island and other jails, 150 political prisoners were freed,
telling bitter tales of torture . two corpses . behind the first
euphoric reaction to the coup there was some fairly grim political
business for the crowd of generals who had accomplished it . the
officers under lieut . general duong van ( " big " ) minh first moved
to consolidate their victory . reportedly they executed the captured
commander of diem's elite special forces, colonel le quang tung, his
brother, the special forces chief of staff, major le quang trieu, and a
former leader of diem's republican youth . they also placed under "
protective custody " several former diem officials . in hue, the rebels
had no difficulty laying their hands on ngo dinh can, 50, diem's
brother and tough overlord of central viet nam . wearing tattered
clothes but carrying a valise containing cash, can sought refuge in the
u.s . consulate, only to be turned out after the state department
received assurances that the generals would allow him " due process of
law . "  the new regime's most embarrassing problem was two corpses
those of diem and his brother, ngo dinh nhu . the official talk of
suicide was obviously phony (see following story) . at the beginning,
the generals apparently tried to spare the brothers' lives, but after
diem escaped from the palace, the junta evidently fell back on the
philosophy of 19th century british poet arthur hugh clough : thou
shalt not kill ; but need'st not strive officiously to keep alive .
diem's eldest
brother, ngo dinh thuc, 66, roman catholic archbishop of hue, was in
rome attending the ecumenical council . another brother, ngo dinh
luyen, 49, was in london, where he resigned as ambassador to the court
of st . james's . diem's 92-year-old mother remained in saigon,
unmolested .
three strongmen . for the
living, there remained the task of putting together a government .
premier nguyen ngoc tho, diem's longtime vice president, appointed nine
civilian ministers mostly nonpolitical civil servants in the old regime
. to counsel tho's government, the brass named a 15-man " council of
sages, " including business and professional leaders . but it is the
military that is running the country . lieut . general tran van don,
46, the polished, french-schooled staff officer who helped mastermind
the coup, was appointed defense minister . major general ton that dinh,
36, the aggressive, vain commander of the saigon district, was named
minister of public security, which gives him control of ngo dinh nhu's
secret police . over both the cabinet and the " sages " is the rebel
officers' 23-member " military revolutionary committee, " which last
week decreed that " the legislative and executive powers are
centralized " in itself, and named general " big " minh chief of state
. within the committee is a twelve-man inner council, with big minh as
chairman, don and dinh as vice chairmen obviously the ruling
triumvirate . the generals promised that when " all democratic
institutions have been set up, " the rebels will " transfer all the
powers back to our entire people, " hinted at elections within a year .
in the meantime, as many political shades as possible will be
represented in the new government, but, said defense minister don, " we
don't want any neutralists . " before the week was out, the regime
lifted martial law and censorship . first to recognize south viet nam's
new government were malaysia and thailand, followed by great britain
and the u.s., which also prepared to restore a $12 million-a-month
import aid program suspended under diem . four tigers . the most
serious danger to the new government is potential rivalry among the
generals . the first hints of this were already appearing as little
major general ton that dinh injected himself into the limelight with
amazing speed . in the first week of victory, security minister dinh
conducted several press conferences of his own, and during one
interview, while protesting that " we must stay as one, " dinh
insinuated that big minh was really only his " front man . " but the
u.s . is betting that, for at least half a year or so, the generals
will stand together, and there are high hopes for a more vigorous, more
efficient pursuit of the war against the communists, with more autonomy
for local commanders than allowed by diem . said big minh : " our main
problem is to make the population happy . this and the military problem
are intertwined . if the population does not feel protected, it will go
over to the viet cong . " in the war, the communist viet cong stepped
up probing actions, but big minh & co . ordered a new corps commander
into the mekong delta, also replaced three division chiefs . said one
pleased american adviser : " they are putting some young tigers out
there . " red north viet nam's radio charged that " u.s . imperialists
schemed through the recent coup to replace the inefficient ngo dinh
diem clique by other henchmen who can serve more effectively their
aggressive war . " it was a handsome testimonial from the enemy .
on the phone .
u.s . admiral harry felt kept an appointment
with diem in saigon on the day set for the coup, a visit scheduled at
least a month previously . he and u.s . ambassador henry cabot lodge
stepped into diem's office at 10 a.m., apparently unaware that half an
hour before key troops had begun moving into position for the coup .
they stayed with diem until well past 11 a.m . as lodge, who was to
leave for washington the following day, took his final departure, diem
remarked : " every time the american ambassador goes away, they try to
pull a coup . " general don saw admiral felt off at the airport a
little anxiously, for the airport itself was scheduled to be seized in
just 90 minutes . don then went on to the generals' lunch . at 1 : 30
p.m . sharp, the insurgent force struck, with red-kerchiefed general
dinh barking the orders . don was assigned to keep lodge informed,
while big minh supervised the whole show . the generals deliberately
kept phone lines open to the palace and to the u.s . embassy . the
palace switchboard (saigon 21584) and particularly diem's direct line
(23126) buzzed with telephonic frustration . with the guard barracks
and the palace both under siege, diem at 4 : 30 p.m . called lodge to
ask for u.s . help against the insurgents . lodge replied : " i'm
concerned for your safety, " asked if diem and his brother would take
advantage of the insurgents' offer of safe-conduct out of viet nam . "
i shall do what duty and good sense indicate must be done, " diem
replied stiffly . " i shall try to restore order . " he hung up . at
church . half an hour later, the insurgent generals called diem to the
phone . one by one, identifying themselves, they asked him to resign
and surrender . finally, big minh delivered an ultimatum : " give up
in five minutes or the palace will be bombed . " diem stood firm, and
the generals, still reluctant at that point to risk killing him, held
their final blow . at 8 : 13 p.m., diem and nhu left the palace not
through escape tunnels, as widely rumored . they simply walked out,
each with an aide, and got into inconspicuous sedans . at that point
the rebels had not yet sealed off the palace, were still passing
civilians who lived on the grounds, and so the brothers managed to
drive through unnoticed . they rendezvoused at a villa in suburban
cholon owned by businessman ma tuyen, leader of the local chinese
community . diem and nhu spent their last night in the chinese
businessman's villa, actually took calls through the palace switchboard
so that the insurgent generals would think they were still there . late
friday night or early saturday, the generals called again and told diem
that his last hope of being rescued by loyal troops from outside saigon
was gone ; general huynh van cao, commander of iv corps in the mekong
delta and the last to hold out, had come over to the rebels . when diem
again refused to surrender, the rebel generals mounted the final
assault . the palace fell, with neither diem nor nhu inside . saturday
morning, all souls' day, the brothers went to cholon's st . francis
xavier church, arriving at 8 : 45 . they walked in, knelt and took
communion . the junta was tipped off by an informer . minutes later an
m-113 armored personnel carrier roared up to the church and the captain
in charge ordered the brothers to get in . at headquarters . saigon
still hums with rumors that diem and nhu were assassinated in the
armored car . according to the new government, which has discarded the
original version of suicide, nhu provoked the captain by insulting him,
and in an ensuing scuffle over a gun, both brothers were killed . the
government now calls this " accidental suicide, " and it is interesting
to speculate what u.s . reaction would have been if diem had put out
such a story about the death of some prisoners of his own . according
to the most reliable account, the brothers died quite differently .
they were driven directly to joint general staff headquarters, where
they were taken into a room with " several generals . " diem was handed
a taperecorder microphone and told to make a statement that he was
resigning the presidency . diem threw the microphone down and said : "
i will not resign . i am the president . you are guilty of treason . "
at this point, nhu leaped into the argument, cursing . one of the
generals backed away, drew a pistol and began shooting . the
bullet-riddled bodies were put back in the armored car and taken off to
st . paul's hospital . last week the bodies were claimed by a relative
of diem's, placed in hermetically sealed metal caskets, and taken back
to coup headquarters .
