india under the banyan tree meeting under a gaudy circus tent in
the fabled pink city of jaipur, the leaders of india's ruling congress
party talked themselves hoarse last week in the first intensive effort
to refurbish their political image since independence came in 1947.
propped on sausage-shaped bolsters under a huge portrait of gandhi, the
dhoti-clad politicians pledged "self-sacrifice" and "democratic
socialism"--and at mealtimes roared off in fin-tailed limousines.
endorsing "nonalignment," party leaders warned ritualistically against
"entanglement with military blocs"- - even as u. s., british and
indian warplanes flew over new delhi in joint air exercises.  after
a six-hour debate on the definition of socialism, the delegates
adjourned the two-day conference and went home to give the subject more
thought.
boost for indira.  another subject they thought about, one that has
almost become a national obsession, is the successor to jawaharlal
nehru, 74.  india today is still smarting from the savage beating it
took at the hands of red china last fall, the economy is faltering
under bureaucratic controls, and the faction-riven government is
flawed with corruption.  restive politicians say bluntly that all
their problems cannot be solved by the stooped, careworn prime
minister and the elderly, out-of-touch congress party leadership.
a celebrated criticism of nehru is that he resembles india's
banyan tree, which proverbially kills every other organism that
grows in its shade.  in the wake of three parliamentary by-election
defeats last spring, nehru announced that he would ask a dozen top
cabinet and state ministers to resign from the government in order
to let them go to work revitalizing the party organization and
rebuilding its strength among the voters.  but the kamaraj plan
was really used by the prime minister as a ruse to flush out all the
top contenders for his own job.  there is even widespread
suspicion that nehru forced the resignations of his ablest ministers
in order to clear the way for his daughter, imperious indira gandhi,
45, widow of a backbench congress politician (no kin to the mahatma),
who has long been the prime minister's closest confidante (he
calls her indu, or moon), official hostess and political
troubleshooter.
ruler of the world.  but discounting indira as a real political
contender, the choice of most party members at present is former home
minister lal bahadur shastri, 59, an honest if colorless politician who,
like his leader, comes from uttar pradesh, india's most populous
state and the traditional breeding ground of congress party leaders.
if shastri is disqualified--he had a heart attack in 1959--a
leading contender for the primeministership would probably be
s. k. patil, 63, a right-winger who runs bombay with brisk efficiency
and until the cabinet purge coped ably with the thankless job of
food minister, though grain shortages prompted the crack that
he "gave india food--for thought."
morarji desai, 67, a stern ascetic who was nehru's finance
minister and was once a favorite to succeed him, has lost much of his
popularity in the past year, largely as a result of his draconian
measures to raise taxes for the defense effort, but could still be
the powerful right wing's choice.
as for nehru, he is determined to hold on to his post indefinitely,
but even india's most popular man occasionally faces the
limitations of fame in a country that is still only 24 per cent
literate.  in a survey of villagers living less than 20 miles from
bustling hyderabad, university researchers reported that peasants
variously identified nehru as "head of a german state," "ruler
of the world," and "some brahman."  named for kamaraj nadar,
former chief minister of madras, who first employed it to
advantage in his own state administration.
