greece  hubris doesn't win  for committing the sin of hubris
(overweening pride), the fates toppled the heroes of ancient greece .
last week greek voters defeated the most successful premier
in the country's history, handsome, hard-driving
constantine karamanlis, who had shown more than a touch of hubris when
he said in a campaign speech:  "the true political leader does not need
the people . the people need the true political leader ." during his
eight-year reign, karamanlis had, as he said, "transformed greece
from an oriental village to a european country ." he brought the nation
into the common market as an associate member, built dams and roads .
on the average, manufacturing has grown an impressive 8 percent annually
in the past decade, government reserves shot up by 400 percent, and
revenues more than doubled - - thanks in part to tourism, which this
year grossed some $90 million .  there are dark spots in this sunny
picture -- some 100,000 young greeks have emigrated to west germany to
find jobs, and poverty retains its grip on primitive mountain villages .
street peddlers in athens still haul sponges, bananas and chesnuts --
but they now walk beneath glittering neon signs that reveal the
internationalization of an increasingly modern economy:  ibm, siemens,
haig & haig, diners club . rejected advice . strongly anti-communist and
pro-nato, karamanlis welded his right-wing national radical union
into a powerful party, gave greece the longest stretch of political
stability in modern times .  but there were protests, when karamanlis
was re-elected for a fourth term in 1961, that police in the back
country had intimidated voters .  though many election brawls were
deliberately provoked by leftists, they convinced left-wing british
laborites and other allies abroad that greece lived under a tyranny .
last june, after
king paul and queen frederika rejected karamanlis' advice to call off
a state visit to britain because of the danger of leftist demonstrations
in london, the premier quit in a huff .  while karamanlis sulked in
a swiss villa for three months and a caretaker cabinet led by his
political allies ruled the country, the opposition center union party
launched an intense election campaign .  it was led by an aged
demosthenes, george papandreou, 75, veteran of several prewar cabinets
and the nation's first postwar premier .  to karamanlis' boast that
greece has prospered, papandreou replied:  "numbers prosper, the people
suffer ."  farmers, who had benefited least from the boom because of
low prices for their goods, got papandreou's easy promise that he would
forgive their debts .  above all, campaigner papandreou concentrated
on the old 1961 charges of election fraud, cried that he was
determined to save the nation from the "fascist and terrorist" policies
of karamanlis .  no thanks .  karamanlis, relying on his impressive
economic record, campaigned as though he expected the people to thank
him for running .  to the surprise of almost everyone, they didn't .
a near-record turnout of 4,600,000 voters gave papandreou's center
union 140 seats in the 300-member parliament; karamanlis' national
radicals got 128 .  winner papandreou celebrated by dancing most of
the night .  karamanlis was furious, hastily announced he was quitting
politics .  after a talk with king paul at tatoi palace, he changed
his mind .  after all, papandreou lacked a majority of eleven seats .
the premier could have a safe margin if he accepted the eager support
of 30 pro-communist deputies, but so far pro-western papandreou has
rejected the offer . between now and dec . 11, when parliament convenes,
karamanlis hopes to attract enough deputies to defeat the opening vote
of confidence, if he succeeds, greece will be in for new elections
and another free-swinging campaign .
