west germany from the tomb when a reservoir broke and flooded an
iron mine near lengede, saxony, two weeks ago, 79 workers scrambled to
safety, and ten more were rescued . the remaining 40, entombed without
food for ten days, were given up for dead . the giant oil drill that
had bored the rescue shafts for the others was dismantled and started
on its way back to the netherlands . the crowds of reporters and
onlookers drifted away . all that remained was to hold a memorial
service . some of the survivors insisted that the rescuers continue
boring exploratory shafts, using a smaller drill . suddenly the
skeptical rescue team was electrified by a series of raps on the drill
bit . over a quickly lowered phone line, word came that eleven men were
alive in an abandoned gallery, 196 ft . below . memorial services were
canceled and the oil rig hurriedly recalled . there were breathless
phone conversations between the miners and their wives, some still in
black mourning dresses . food and tranquilizers were sent down .
chancellor ludwig erhard flew in from bonn by helicopter and made a
little " good luck " speech to the trapped men . said he : " all
german hearts are with you, in confidence that you'll soon again see
the light of day . " an investigation was launched to see if there had
been negligence at the mine, and the east german radio even managed to
find a propaganda issue capitalist callousness . meanwhile, the rescue
work continued . the drill had to work slowly because of the danger of
a cave-in, but eventually and luckily pierced the only spot in the
gallery's roof that was solid rock . just 103 hours after the eleven
were heard from, the first of the miners emerged from the " rescue
bomb, " a sort of torpedoshaped elevator that had been lowered into the
new shaft with two volunteer rescue workers . fifty-seven minutes
later, all eleven were miraculously out, weak but unharmed after 13
days underground . . . . (tridots) but mining remains perilous . within
hours after the german miners were miraculously saved in saxony, a coal
dust explosion on the southern japanese island of kyushu killed more
than 300 miners and trapped hundreds of others .
