middle east danger : professor at work touring the
middle east under the auspices of the u.s . state department, duke
ellington and his band found themselves caught in the middle of a coup
in iraq last week . fascinated by the goings-on, the duke promised to
compose a new piece, " the baghdad rock and i do mean rocking with
rockets, bombs and all . " the duke might just as well write another
piece called the damascus reel, for syria, too, underwent a shake-up,
quieter but no less significant . behind the sudden shuffle of middle
eastern leaders was a power struggle inside a strange new political
force, the baath (renaissance) party, which in little less than a year
has turned from a shadowy, clandestine movement without popular support
into a dynamic power challenging gamal abdel nasser for leadership of
the arab world . the avowed aim of baath is to unite iraq and syria,
which it already controls, and to add all other arab countries to this
union, through persuasion or subversion . last week's tussles were
caused partly by the clash of ambitions within the party, partly by
differences over how quickly and radically the baath aims should be
pursued . out of the shadows . in syria, premier salah bitar, 52, a
co-founder of the baath party, resigned after being accused in party
councils of " self-isolation from the masses . " translation : he must
make way for an ambitious, younger rival . the rival : amin hafez, 42,
syrian commander in chief and a top party leader, who took over as
premier . as a prelude to his swearingin, jets whooshed overhead in
salute and to discourage any possible trouble . in iraq, the struggle
was between burly vice premier ali saleh saadi, a radical, and a
faction of moderates headed by foreign minister talib shabib and
interior minister hazim jawad . saadi and his friends want more or less
instant socialization of the iraqi economy, crackdown on the middle
class, revolution throughout the arab world, and an anti-western policy
. shabib, jawad & co . favor a slower, more conciliatory course . at
first it looked like a clear victory for the moderates . backed by
gun-toting aides, shabib and jawad seized saadi and three other cabinet
ministers, bundled them into a military plane without luggage and flew
them to exile in madrid where saadi kept hinting that he would yet
return to iraq in triumph . next morning saadi's supporters in the
labor unions and the national guard poured into the streets of baghdad,
led by air force colonel munzer wandari, a fiercely mustachioed fanatic
who personally took up a jet fighter and strafed the presidential
palace with rockets . when the moderates called on the army for help,
troops cleared the streets and jailed wandari . but he had apparently
made his point . an emergency meeting of the baath high command decided
upon a plague-on-both-your-houses gesture : shabib, jawad and five
aides were hustled into another plane and sent into exile too in beirut
. strangely silent in the uproar was the one non-baathist in a position
of power, iraq's president abdul salam aref, who was reportedly under
palace arrest . until party elections are held some time next year,
iraq will apparently be run by the baath central committee (which
includes a jordanian, a lebanese and a kuwaiti as well as iraqi and
syrian generals) and by michel aflak, the secretary-general and real
power in the party . it was the first time that aflak, a withdrawn,
seemingly gentle intellectual who has sanctioned the executions of
hundreds of political opponents, emerged from his shadowy position
behind the scenes . national families . what precisely is baath ?
nasser seems to consider it an even greater threat than his old
enemies, the arab monarchies of jordan and saudi arabia, and complains
: " i have read every book by or about baath and i could understand
nothing . " a western diplomat describes it as an " arab cosa nostra .
/ on the contrary, one knowledgeable observer thinks baath " is
probably ahead of its time reformist, progressive and secular in a
world of arabs bound by tradition, religion and narrow, personal
interest . " founder aflak, 53, whose scholarly manner has won him the
nickname " the professor, " defines baath through his career as much as
through his words born in damascus to the greek orthodox faith in an
overwhelmingly moslem environment (aflak's father was a moderately
successful grain merchant, and his mother, now 75, is still
illiterate), aflak got honors in history at the sorbonne . in paris he
argued politics with other afro-asian students, read marx, nietzsche
and jefferson . he says, " i quickly found marxism inadequate, based on
materialism without human and spiritual values, without national
consciousness . nations are only large families, and the arab family
needs more than marx . thus we evolved the baathist doctrine of
socialism mingled with nationalism and the human spirit . " returning
to damascus as a teacher, aflak was soon indoctrinating students in his
revolutionary ideals, drawing support from those who were overeducated,
unemployed sons of the poor . in 1942, after leading a strike against
fench history texts being used in syrian schools, he quit teaching and
became a fulltime agitator, drawing support from those who, like
himself, were overeducated, underemployed sons of peasants and workers
. the luminous classical arabic of his political tracts fills baathists
with ecstasy, but in english translation, his ideas seem rather murky
: " nationalism is love before everything else " ; " revolution is
the opposition of truth to the existing situation . " aflak wrote
baath's democratic-sounding constitution in five days, and it has never
since been changed or, for that matter, implemented .
by 1947, after the french left
syria, baath had 1,000 carefully selected members, and aflak called the
first national congress in a damascus cafe . two years later he was
strong enough to help topple a syrian government and served in the
cabinet for three months before resigning on the ground that he was of
more value to baath outside the government than in it . colliding
ambitions . aflak was profoundly shaken by the 1948 arab defeat in
palestine . during the fighting he prowled the front, living with arab
troops . " the arab social structure was responsible for the disaster,
/ he says . " a society based on disunity and inequality prevented the
arabs from reaching their full potential . " today he is as vocal as
any arab leader about driving the israelis into the sea . at first,
baath worked willingly with nasser . at the third party congress in
1956, baath decided on the union of syria with egypt that was
accomplished two years later . but the rival ambitions of nasser and
baath collided . syria broke away from egypt in 1961 and became a
baath-dominated state after a military coup last march . baath had
already won bloody control of iraq a month earlier and televised the
gory scene of the execution of dictator kassem . since then, baath has
successfully and bloodily put down two nasserite insurrections in iraq
and five in syria, and its leaders are understandably bitter about
nasser . says one : " we loved him and cherished him, the bastard .
nasser is a lost prophet . he tries to annihilate us, the devil . we
are idealists and don't want to kill, but he makes us kill . we have to
use his tactics, damn him . " the egyptian press and radio in turn
picture aflak as a combination of robespierre, stalin, ben-gurion and
the pope . whenever cairo radio mentions him, it is followed by the
interjection " yani, yani " (i mean, i mean), gibing at the fuzziness
of his political concepts . total hostility . baath depends on 50,000
party members scattered in eightman cells throughout the arab world . "
we could take in thousands more, " aflak boasts, " but we must screen
out opportunists, idlers and enemy agents . " not only nasser, but also
arab monarchs, businessmen and the traditional, middle-class
politicians detest baath . arab christians fear being submerged in a
united arab state . the kurdish tribesmen, who are moslems but not
arabs, have waged a long, bitter war for autonomy in northern iraq .
originally, the communists were numbered among the many foes of baath,
and in iraq were hunted down and executed, while moscow railed against
/ baathist genocide . " but recently, perhaps in a search for allies, a
baath official in iraq announced that " the red hunt is over, " and
hundreds of communists were released from jail . communist leaders are
joining baath in calling for " the liquidation of feudalism, " and the
baath party newspaper proclaims " total hostility gainst capitalism . "
still betting that iraq and syria, while anti-western, will remain
anti-communist, the u.s . this year is supplying credits and loans of
more than $60 million . in taking over, baath found both countries
nearly bankrupt and has tried to revive the economy with socialist
cure-alls ranging from nationalization of industry (including, in
syria, the advertising business) to converting state land into farm
collectives . for strategic reasons, a paved highway from baghdad to
damascus is being pushed to completion . this year's rich cotton
harvest promises a $100 million windfall for syria, and iraq's coffers
are being refilled by oil revenues . brainwashing . as set up by aflak,
the organization of baath resembles that of the communist party . each
cell elects a leader, cell leaders elect district chiefs and so on, up
to the various regional congresses . over them stands the powerful
central committee, which really runs the whole show . in dealing with
political opponents, baath tends to rely on the firing squad, but baath
meetings are conducted strictly by robert's rules of order . membership
is gained only after a minimum of two years as a candidate " on trial
for sincerity and intensity . " baathism is being extended to the
syrian and iraqi armies in addition to military duty each soldier must
spend two hours a day being politically indoctrinated . baathist police
officials are now trying their hand at brainwashing political
prisoners, and boast that they have even converted communists . as last
week proved, baath can be as hard on its own leaders as on its enemies
. michel aflak, as secretary-general of the baath central committee,
has survived as the only stable element in baath . he has never made a
radio or tv speech, seldom appears in public, but he is a virtuoso in
man-to-man discussions, and premiers, cabinet members and generals
dutifully report to him for " advice . " in fact, many of the decisions
in last week's wholesale firings of baath leaders were hammered out in
aflak's modest, four-room damascus apartment, with wash flapping on the
balcony and his two small children playing underfoot until the crisis
forced him to fly to baghdad and take charge personally . he was
plainly reluctant to do so . " i stay away from power, " he says . " i
am incapable of governing . " aflak is confident of accomplishing all
his visionary goals in his own lifetime . says he : " we have many
intellectuals in the party, but not enough executive and technical
talent . we need more trained cadres . we need more funds . we need
more time . we need more of everything . " the major problem is whether
baath's old arab enemies and new communist allies as well as its own
impatient radicals will allow the party the time it needs . meanwhile,
does aflak ever have nightmares about baath's victims ? he says : "
we only dream about our destiny . /
