cold war how much trade with the reds ? no one knows better
than moscow that trade is a weapon in the cold war . " with every
additional shovel of coal, with every additional load of oil obtained
through foreign help, " old bolshevik lev kamenev once predicted, "
capitalism will be digging its own grave . " faced with the continuing
failure of their economy, the russians may be forced to rely on wheat
from the west for years to come, but above all they want to get hold of
heavy industrial items including whole factories, which russian
industry on its own cannot duplicate for a long time to come . western
policy is divided on how to meet this soviet commercial appeal . some
believe that trade with the red bloc may have political advantage by
making the satellites less dependent on moscow and possibly making
moscow more dependent on the west . others, notably west germany's
former chancellor konrad adenauer, feel that the west should trade with
russia only in return for cold war concessions . washington believes
that this policy is not feasible, if only because u.s . allies are
eager to trade with the reds, are scarcely even willing to rule out
strategic items that nato specifically forbids . western european
exports to the soviet bloc last year climbed by 10 per cent to $2.2
billion(compared with u.s . sales of $125 million) . what washington
worries about is not the sheer volume of such deals but the terms .
weakened willingness . the u.s . feels that if the russians want to
trade, they should be forced to use up their meager gold reserves and
not be granted what they want long-term credits . such credits would
release massive soviet investment for military needs and divert
free-world resources from aid to underdeveloped nations . under
secretary of state george ball last week wound up a tour of western
europe during which he argued the u.s . case for a unified, stiffer
western credit policy at least 20 per cent cash and the rest within
five years . ball received his friendliest hearing in west germany,
even though bonn tops the list of allied traders with the reds . west
germany last year did just over 1 billion worth of official business
with moscow and its satellites (including $422 million with the soviet
union and $213 million with east germany) ; no one can guess
accurately how much more private trade went on . though some german
industrialists were anxious for the government to guarantee long-term
credits, chancellor ludwig erhard ruled out the idea as long as the
soviets block german reunification . said erhard : " such credits
would strengthen the soviet position, so that its willingness to
negotiate would be weakened . " gentlemen's disagreement . in paris,
ball also got a sympathetic reception, a pleasant change for a u.s .
envoy these days . france last year exported to the soviet bloc goods
worth only about $266 million ; russian barter proposals, involving a
swap of soviet coal and oil for heavy industrial goods, are highly
unattractive since france can sell its own coal and oil inside the
common market . besides, charles de gaulle believes that trading with
the soviets is a dirty business (although he seems willing to trade
with red china) and recently denied an export license to a leading
french steel company that was all set to build a refinery in russia .
only in london did ball find opposition ; the british flatly declined
to join the gentlemen's agreement to restrict the soviets' credit .
britain is especially fond of the idea that more trade with moscow,
including strategic goods, will eventually pacify the soviets .
moreover, the new tory government is eager to reduce unemployment by
increasing output and shipping the goods overseas as fast as possible .
the plan has not worked so far : british exports to russia and eastern
europe totaled only about $310 million in 1962, and no big trade deal
appears imminent .
