cold war of bases & bombs at first glimpse, it certainly
bore all the signs of a u.s.-soviet deal . first the news broke that
premier khrushchev, in a secret letter to president kennedy, had agreed
to remove the biggest obstacle to a nuclear test-ban treaty by
permitting on-site inspections in russia . soon afterward, the u.s .
confirmed that it was preparing to dismantle its jupiter base in
turkey, the very thing that khrushchev had demanded when the u.s .
forced him to get his medium-range missiles out of cuba, and its bases
in italy, too . was there really a deal ? no . the two events have
really no connection . the khrushchev offer, while proof of his
continued mellowing, is negligible ; any test ban would depend on
conditions virtually impossible to fulfill now . as for the removal of
american missile installations from turkey and italy, its purpose, said
president kennedy, is simple to put the u.s . " in a stronger position
/ by substituting potent polaris submarines for the immobile,
vulnerable irbms, sitting ducks for soviet retaliation . solid v .
liquid . months before khrushchev suggested his cuba-for-turkey swap,
the joint chiefs had begun considering the phase-out of bases in
turkey, italy, and in england as well . the dismantling of the 60 thor
missiles in britain is to begin this spring . more than compensating
for their loss are eight polaris subs operating out of holy loch,
scotland, each toting 16 missiles . to replace the 15 jupiters in
turkey and the 30 in italy, the u.s . plans to deploy possibly six subs
in mediterranean waters . total firepower : 96 missiles, each with a
nuclear-tipped warhead packing the equivalent of 800,000 tons of tnt .
compared with jupiter's 1,500-mile reach, the current polaris missiles
have a range of 1,380 to 1,725 miles, and before long the subs will get
a-3 models with a 2,875mile range . though moscow is hard at work on
anti-sub devices, u.s . experts see no evidence that the russians have
come up with an effective defense against the fleet of 41 polaris subs
that will be at sea by 1967 . both turkey and italy swiftly accepted
the changeover . to provide berthing facilities for the subs, the u.s .
hopes to expand its naval base at rota on spain's atlantic coast .
question of boxes . the chance of a workable nuclear test-ban treaty
seemed equally remote . actually, khrushchev first agreed to the
principle of on-site inspections way back in 1959, when britain's prime
minister macmillan was in moscow, only to shelve it after he broke the
three-year test moratorium in 1961 . but having concluded his own
latest nuclear test series, khrushchev doubtless figures that he has
little to lose from an effort to stop all testing for a while . " the
time has come now, " khrushchev wrote kennedy just before christmas, "
to put an end once and for all to nuclear tests . we are ready to meet
you halfway . " to nikita, halfway meant two or three inspections each
year to investigate suspicious tremors ; the u.s . thought that eight
inspections would be the minimum, having whittled that down from its
original twelve . while the u.s . has been demanding that at least a
dozen unmanned seismic detection stations, or " black boxes, " be
installed on soviet soil, khrushchev said that three would do one each
in siberia's altai mountains, the virgin lands of soviet central asia
and the soviet far east . " we believe, " he concluded, " that now the
road to agreement is straight and clear . " atmospheric noise . this
was clearly not kennedy's view, but he declared himself " encouraged, "
suggested that exploratory talks be held and, after they got started,
ordered a halt to the current series of u.s . underground tests to
improve their chances of success . last week soviet u.n . ambassador
nikolai t . fedorenko and veteran geneva negotiator semyon k .
tsarapkin were closeted in washington with u.s . arms control and
disarmament agency chief william c . foster and british ambassador sir
david ormsby gore . there was no shortage of problems . in moscow, dour
foreign minister andrei gromyko declared, " france must sign, " fully
aware that de gaulle has no intention of joining a test ban . another
question was how to ring in red china, which is expected to explode an
a-bomb by year's end . since peking had not yet done so, gromyko said,
the problem was " artificial . " anxious to keep the talks going, u.s .
officials grasped at straws  and hopeful phrases .  " i don't think
this closes the door, " said one . " it's just atmospheric noise . "
