west germany remembrance two specters rose to remind germans of
events that took place a quarter century and more ago, but had still
the power to evoke deep emotions . reichstag revived . in west berlin,
the reichstag once again became habitable . a huge, florid structure of
silesian sandstone since 1894 the home of whatever democracy germany
knew from the days of bismarck through the weimar republic the building
had bulked vacant and lifeless ever since it was gutted by fire on feb
. 27, 1933 . the nazis claimed the fire was kindled by communists as
the signal for a red uprising, and a confused dutch boy named marinus
van der lubbe was beheaded for his alleged part in the crime . since
the reichstag fire gave hitler a pretext to gain complete control of
germany, most historians have concluded that the fire was set by the
nazis themselves, possibly even by hermann goring in person . the
reichstag was further damaged by allied bombers and by shellfire in the
closing days of world war ii . though many germans thought that it
should remain in ruins as a reminder of the past slow reconstruction
work was begun in 1958 . by last week the south wing, containing 45
offices, seven conference rooms and a presidential suite, was formally
reopened . it will take about four more years and an additional $12.5
million to completely restore the reichstag . unanswered, so far, is
the question of who will occupy it and why . the bundestag is unlikely
to leave bonn for berlin for fear of bringing cries of " provocation "
from russia . most likely, the reconstructed reichstag will stand empty
through the years, serving west germany and west berlin as a mute
symbol of the hope of eventual reunification of the nation .
kristallnacht mourned . all over west germany, ceremonies marked the
25th anniversary of kristallnacht (night of crystal), when hitler's
storm troopers went on a nationwide rampage against the property,
dignity and life of the 400,000 jews who had not yet fled their german
homeland . synagogues were put to the torch . thousands of jewish
stores were plundered and had their windows smashed (hence the night's
bitter nickname) . thirty-six jews were murdered and 25,000 arrested .
the pogrom had been inspired by the assassination of german diplomat
ernst vom rath in paris by a 17-year-old stateless jew named hershel
grynszpan. it was, joseph goebbels told hitler, a propaganda
opportunity equal to that of the reichstag fire . hitler agreed, and
the storm troopers were released for their " spontaneous " action,
while regular police turned their backs . both german television
networks last week filled their peak viewing hours with programs
mercilessly reminding germans of what they had allowed to happen .
leading newspapers devoted entire pages to recollecting in detail the
horrors of kristallnacht . said chancellor ludwig erhard : " we mourn
with the survivors and with jewry in the entire world . no man can make
up for the injustice that was done . " on tour in africa, west berlin's
mayor willy brandt sent greetings to a memorial service held at the
rebuilt jewish community center on berlin's fasanenstrasse . there,
heinz galinski, the leader of the city's 6,000 remaining jews (down
from 160,500 in 1933), handed out awards to " unsung heroes of the nazi
era, " 44 germans who had risked death to give shelter and protection
to jews .
ironically, it was discovered after his death that
diplomat vom rath had been an active anti-nazi . young grynszpan was
found guilty of manslaughter by a french court and sentenced to 20
years in prison . he was serving his term at sante prison when the
nazis occupied all of france, and his ultimate fate is still unknown .
