the nations " how sorrowful bad " in halting
english, a moslem telegraph operator in the middle east tapped out on
the telex : " is it correct kennedy killed pls ? " when new york
replied, " yes, an hour ago, " the moslem signed off, " how sorrowful
bad . " as the shadow of the news spread across the world, it was
received everywhere with stunned disbelief . the empress of iran broke
into tears, as did the president of tanganyika, and countless anonymous
men and women . along rome's via veneto grief sounded operatic . " e
morto ! " people called to one another, and at a cocktail party the
guests put down their glasses and began to recite the lord's prayer .
wherever monarchs still ruled in the united kingdom, in jordan formal
court mourning was proclaimed . hardly a nation in the world failed to
order the rites of tolling bells and lowered flags . theaters and
sports arenas closed down on individual impulse . with the news of
kennedy's death, a viennese ice show halted in mid-performance ; in
belgium, a six-day bicycle race was interrupted ; in distant nepal,
the ceremonial opening of a leprosarium was postponed . everywhere,
bars, cafes and restaurants emptied long before closing time .
strangers spoke to each other in short, simple phrases " poor jackie, "
or " how awful, " or " it can't be true . " the phones of americans
abroad never ceased ringing, as foreign friends and acquaintances or
even total strangers called to offer sympathy . the streets in front of
u.s . embassies were jammed with mourners who stood in line for hours
to write their names in books of condolence . some brought flowers, but
many searched out an american diplomat merely to shake his hand .
monstrous act . one by one the statesmen joined the chorus of
commiseration . as big ben tolled every minute for one hour (a gesture
normally reserved for deaths in the royal family), prime minister sir
alec douglas-home said : " there are times when the mind and the heart
stand still . " from sir winston churchill came a statement : " this
monstrous act has taken from us a great statesman and a wise and
valiant man . " the words still seemed to carry the old, sibilant
indignation of the ancient lion . liberia's president william tubman
cabled : " the urn of grief has been opened and is being filled with
the tears of friends the world over . " israel's david ben-gurion only
asked : " why, why ? " almost by reflex, people rushed to disclaim
even remote complicity in the murder . " thank god it wasn't a negro, "
said a negro in toronto . many others insisted on reading into the
event their own political passions . statesmen in africa, asia and
elsewhere insisted that the deed must have been done by a racist, and
that kennedy was a martyr like lincoln or gandhi . and nehru could not
resist remarking that the murder gave evidence of " dark corners in the
u.s., and this great tragedy is a slap for the concept of democracy . "
golden boy . the mourning voices first of all were for the president of
the united states, regardless of his name or identity . for in a sense
far beyond daily foreign policy squabbles, he is to much of the world
the protector of the weak, the benefactor of the poor . because of the
changes in the cold war climate that occurred during his
administration, millions, even on the enemy side, mourned john kennedy
as a man of peace . but above all they mourned him for his person .
perhaps even more than his own countrymen, other peoples saw in him the
embodiment of american virtues youth, strength, informality, good
looks, the idealistic belief that all problems can eventually be solved
. a southern rhodesian paper called him " the golden boy, " and common
market president walter hallstein said that kennedy " personified the
most beautiful qualities of his people . " possibly more than any other
president in u.s . history, he had set out to charm the world, and he
had succeeded in convincing many a nation that it was his special
favorite .
it was the same in asia . in thailand,
authorities sent sound trucks into the villages to spread the mournful
news that prathanathibodi (president) kennedy was dead . in saigon,
people were more shocked by kennedy's death than they had been by that
of president diem ; and buddhists held special memorial services and
prayers . in japan, technicians were up before dawn to receive the
historic first trans-pacific tv broadcast from the u.s., which was to
have included a personal message from the president . instead, the
voice of a japanese newsman in manhattan reported the news of kennedy's
death . in all of asia, red china was almost alone in its determined
lack of sympathy . peking radio carried the kennedy story without
comment . the hong kong communist new evening post sneered that kennedy
had " used a two-faced policy to promote an imperialist war course . "
vanishing baiters . even cuba proved less surly than red china . fidel
castro deplored the murder, said he had no reason to wish for kennedy's
death, but conceded that " perhaps " cuba might have had motives " to
feel like it " and vaguely suggested that " reactionaries " were really
to blame . elsewhere in latin america, all the yankee baiting seemed to
disappear for the moment . a sense of pessimism about the future
gripped brazil, and the downtown streets of rio de janeiro were filled
with people whose tight faces, glazed eyes and unaccustomed silence
revealed their feelings . in the favelas (shantytowns) on rio's
outskirts, samba bands called off their rehearsals for the carnival,
and president joao goulart said about kennedy : " i kneel before his
memory . " the most eloquent latin american voices were those heard in
the street . a janitor in quito, who had been listening to the news on
radio, refused to read his newspaper because " it's too painful to go
over such a sad story again . " despite later revelations about the
crime, most latin americans persisted in believing that kennedy had
been slain because of his support for negro rights . in buenos aires,
women cried, " que barbaridad ! " , and old men made sad, futile
gestures with their hands . said one grieving colombian : " it seems
as though all the presidents in all the latin american countries have
died . " to the north, throughout canada, theaters and arenas closed
their doors, and large cities became hushed with a curious quiet .
prime minister lester pearson was just about to open a session of
parliament when he was handed a note . he threw it on the top of his
desk, slumped back in his seat and seemed at a loss for words . his
voice broke as he said : " the world can ill afford at this time in
our history to lose a man of his courage . " history's more precise
appraisals would come later, as would the resumption of all the world's
usual enmities . but for a brief time at least, the u.n . general
assembly, standing in silence, was in a mood to agree with u.s .
ambassador adlai stevenson, who said : " all of us who knew him will
bear the grief of his death to the day of ours . /
