south viet nam optimism at honolulu, problems in saigon in admiral
harry felt's reinforced concrete command post high above pearl harbor,
top u.s . officials last week gathered for the first exhaustive policy
study of south viet nam since the coup that toppled the diem regime the
nine-hour conference secretary of state dean rusk, defense secretary
robert mcnamara and joint chiefs of staff chairman maxwell taylor had
flown in from washington ; from saigon came ambassador henry cabot
lodge and general paul harkins . the honolulu meeting exuded almost
relentless optimism about the war, and the policymakers clung bravely
to the line that things should be sufficiently in hand by 1965 to
permit complete withdrawal of the 16,500 american troops . just in time
. one of the few concrete decisions leaked from the conference was a
hardly surprising agreement to intensify anti-guerrilla operations in
south viet nam's rice bowl, a wedge-shaped section of the mekong delta
from saigon south, where one-third of the population is concentrated
and the viet cong is strongest . another decision : to revise the
government's strategic hamlet program . all too often in the past ,
reluctant peasants were herded into bleak " fortified " villages that
were in fact insufficiently protected because they were too hastily
built . meanwhile the red guerrillas, who were supposed to be starving
in the no man's land outside the hamlets, managed to live well enough
off the land . henceforth, the plan is to see that all existing
villages are really defensible and more pleasant to live in, with
schools and dispensaries . as the conference adjourned, the war in
south viet nam was proceeding fitfully . new, aggressive commanders
reported several successful attacks against the guerrillas, but in the
delta the communists still seemed to have the initiative . vietnamese
officers and many of their u.s . advisers claim that because of diem's
military mismanagement, the coup came just in time to keep the
communists from gaining complete control of two disputed provinces
close to saigon . this may or may not be true, but the argument offers
a built-in chance to blame diem later, in case things should go
seriously wrong . no more siestas . in saigon, lieut . general duong
van ( " big " ) minh, the head of the ruling military junta, rode about
almost unnoticed in a black citroen (in contrast to diem's vast
motorcades), visiting a few government offices and military units . he
also opened promising negotiations with vietnamese sects that had
withdrawn support from diem but were not ready to rally to the new
regime . but while still clearly favored by the population, the new
regime seemed oddly reluctant to assume political leadership . one of
its few decisions : to abolish the siesta that has traditionally
closed government offices for 2f hours each afternoon . despite the
mournful yawns of civil servants, the new decree enables peasants and
rural officials to complete their business in the capital earlier and
return home safely before dusk, when the viet cong start harassing
traffic on all the roads radiating from saigon .
