cambodia " balance of menaces " a chubby little man in a dark
blue suit strode into the sports stadium of the steamy cambodian
capital of pnompenh (pronounced nom-pen) last week, mounted the
platform, and began haranguing the assembled crowd in a whiny,
high-pitched voice . the speaker was prince norodom sihanouk,
neutralist, mercurial ruler of cambodia, and he had called the rally to
announce in effect that the u.s . was working to undermine his regime .
turning theatrically to the throng, sihanouk asked whether the national
honor did not demand that cambodia reject any future help from the
americans . when his subjects roared obedient approval, the prince
ordered : " so be it . " sihanouk might change his mind again, as he
has before . in a formal note to washington, he called for a halt to
all american economic and military aid, which in the past eight years
has amounted to $366 million . and so the u.s . already striving to
save war-torn south viet nam and " neutral " but tottering laos from
the reds faced another mess in southeast asia . shaken neighbor . what
was ailing the prince ? a suspicious, emotional, french-educated
descendant of cambodia's medieval khmer kings, he once performed
slapstick parts in movies (which he produced himself) and has often
played slapstick politics . friends seriously reported last week that
two contributing reasons for sihanouk's bad mood might be that 1) he
had been crash-dieting to lose 15 lbs . in ten days, and 2) the u.s .
transferred a former military advisory chief with whom the prince
enjoyed playing volleyball . the prince himself accused the u.s . of
supporting a clandestine radio, on south viet nam soil, run by the
prince's political opposition (the u.s . denied the charge) .
but, above all, the
prince talks of the " inevitability " of communist china's takeover of
southeast asia, hence may be trying to save himself by cozying up to
the red dragon . what precipitated his latest performance could well
have been the overthrow and assassination of his late neighbor, south
viet nam's ngo dinh diem . although sihanouk and diem were bitter
enemies, the prince was shaken by diem's death and attributed it to the
cutoff of diem's american aid . possibly determined never to get
himself on the same vulnerable spot, sihanouk moved quickly to lessen
his dependence on the u.s . opening to the seine . for all his
eccentric behavior, sihanouk has also sometimes proved himself a shrewd
politician . since independence from france ten years ago, he has
jailed home-grown communists and wooed his red-hot young leftist
critics into the government while at the same time maintaining warm
relations with russia and red china . sihanouk last week performed
another typically slippery gyration . instead of rushing right into
peking's arms, he turned to his old colonial tutor, france, and asked
her to help replace u.s . aid . said the prince : " for our country,
liberated from the u.s . and which the communist powers do not wish to
take in charge, it could be the hour of france . " the invitation was
another potential opening for charles de gaulle, who wants to wheel and
deal in the area of france's old indo-china empire (he keeps suggesting
a " neutralized " viet nam, hinted last week that france may establish
diplomatic relations with communist north viet nam) . but whether paris
will fill the gap to be left by the elimination of a $30 million annual
u.s . dole remains to be seen . france has been supplying cambodia only
one tenth the u.s.'s contribution, mostly to maintain a 300-man force
training the cambodian army .
at week's end the prince
climaxed his perplexing theatrics by calling in the press corps,
delivering a meandering monologue interspersed with giggles . proudly,
he announced that red china had offered him military support . " i
think i have achieved a balance of menaces, " he said . " the menace of
the imperialists and their lackeys is counterbalanced by the menace of
communist china, our no . 1 friend . " but he indicated that he would
have only four chinese civilian advisers and no chinese military
advisers : " everywhere in our army there will be only one power
helping us france . " added the prince : " i do not like to be a
satellite . i like to be free . " serving champagne all around, he
urged the correspondents to drink up because (jokingly referring to
impending austerity) " in a few months i won't be able to offer
champagne .
