iraq
until the next coup for a while last week it seemed impossible to tell
who was up and who was down in iraq . perhaps the principals themselves
were not sure . two weeks ago, the baath party (time, nov . 22) seemed
firmly in control . the country's non-baathist president, field marshal
abdul salam aref, seemed a mere figurehead, kept on for his prestige
and popularity . then an internecine conflict erupted between baath's
anti-western, anti-bourgeois and anti-aref radical wing and a more
conciliatory moderate faction . rushing in from neighboring syria, the
baath party's home base, the party central committee under michel aflak
appeared to settle the matter by exiling the leaders of the opposing
factions . although syrian-dominated, the party leaders took charge in
iraq, placed aref under palace arrest and turned baghdad over to the
national guard, a baath-led outfit for which the regular army has
contempt . when the baath bosses overconfidently released aref a few
days later, he promptly joined with angry fellow officers to head a
coup . at dawn one morning last week, the army attacked baghdad with
six infantry battalions, supported by armor, artillery and jets .
though the national guard had no heavy weapons, they fought
desperately, lost hundreds of men . three days after the revolt,
baghdad was in aref's hands . since the baath party is nasser's
archenemy, the coup was at first hailed in egypt as pro-nasser . it was
also denounced in syria as anti-baath . both conclusions may be
premature . the coup looked more like a military than a political
affair, designed to purge iraq of baath elements who had had the
temerity to downgrade the army in favor of the national guard . though
he packed the syrian baath leaders off to damascus, aref included in
his new cabinet nine moderate baathists . still, the middle east being
what it is, aref may well join with nasser, an old friend, to overthrow
the baath leadership in syria . even more likely, the baath leadership
will try to overthrow aref . just about the only certainty in the
situation is that there is bound to be another coup, in baghdad or in
damascus, if not both .
