congo reading the russians' mail a couple of soviet diplomats
got the kind of treatment in the congo last week that many other
countries have often wished but not dared to mete out to red envoys .
almost from the day of the congo's independence in 1960, the russians
and their satellites worked doggedly to destroy what little stability
the country had in hopes of getting a communist faction in control .
expelled en masse after the demise of erratic patrice lumumba, the reds
began filtering back into leopoldville last year, notably to the
towering eight-story apartment building that is both embassy and
residence for soviet ambassador sergei nemchina and his 100-man staff
of operatives . two of nemchina's most important aides, his slim, fair
embassy counselor boris voronin and stocky, bushy-haired press attache
yuri miakotnykh, have developed especially close contacts with
extremists opposed to premier cyrille adoula's moderate regime .
miakotnykh worked hard to penetrate the trade unions and leftwing
student groups, even lobbied in the corridors of parliament . tug of
war . what worried the government most was the close contact of the two
russians with a plotting exile group led by lumumba's former party
chief christophe gbenye, who made his headquarters across the congo
river in the ex-french congo capital of brazzaville . one day last
week, when voronin and miakotnykh drove down to the river bank, known
as " le beach, " for the ferry ride over to brazzaville, adoula's cops
decided to stop them on the way back and find out what they had been up
to . surrounding their car at the landing stage, congolese police
insisted on a search . with a shrug, the russians opened the trunk,
then let them look in the front and back seats . but voronin was
clearly determined not to give up his briefcase, and hugged it to his
chest as he and miakotnykh got back into the car . to make sure the
russians did not try to start the engine and speed away, the police let
the air out of their tires, then pulled open the doors and began a tug
of war with voronin's legs, yanking his shoes off in the process . as
they pulled, miakotnykh clung just as fiercely to voronin, until at
last, both men were dragged out feet first, relieved of the briefcase
and heaved unceremoniously into a pickup truck . when one of the
russians tried to stuff a document inside his shirt, a congolese guard
ripped the entire front of his shirt off . out in the rain . with that,
the prisoners were driven off to a military camp outside leopoldville,
and the contents of voronin's briefcase were taken to police
headquarters . sure enough, claimed the government, among them was a
letter from gbenye to the russians asking for 5 billion in counterfeit
congolese francs to be used to undermine the congo's currency, and
another document requesting arms, tape records and " other espionage
equipment . " one of the letters bore teeth marks, as if a russian had
tried to swallow it . to put an abrupt stop to such soviet activities,
squads of congolese police were rushed to cordon off the russians'
apartments, and inside, the russians suddenly discovered themselves
without telephone service and without electricity, which meant they
would have to swelter in the heat without air conditioners and do
without cookstoves . two czech diplomats who drove up to the gate were
arrested and forced to stand outside most of the night in a tropical
downpour . from moscow came an angry demand for the release of the
prisoners, who, according to izvestia, had been arrested by police led
by " american advisers . " ignoring the protest, adoula's agents next
morning swooped down on the hotel room of another suspected communist
troublemaker, the newly arrived correspondent of the soviet news agency
novisti, hustled him off to a cell . he was later released, but by
week's end, the two russian diplomats were put aboard europe-bound
planes . usually hesitant premier adoula rejected his cabinet's
recommendation that diplomatic relations with russia and czechoslovakia
be severed . but he did order ambassador nemchina to get out of the
congo within 24 hours and take the entire 100-man staff with him .
