great britain after hugh, who ? the death of hugh
gaitskell has left britain's opposition without a single figure who can
be counted on to unite the labor party behind him . worse yet, with
election talk in the air, laborites fear that no likely successor is of
sufficient stature to win immediate national acceptance as a potential
prime minister . the party is torn between two leading contenders who
personify the warring extremes within the party that took hugh
gaitskell seven turbulent years to pacify . top right-wing candidate is
deputy leader george brown, an earthy, onetime errand boy who
infuriates leftist intellectuals by addressing them as " brother . "
brown, 48, is a staunch anti-communist, a firm believer in the western
alliance, and, until gaitskell committed the party to an anti-european
line, was a vigorous advocate of british membership in the common
market . gutty, impulsive, often explosively gauche, brown has had
little formal education or top-level administrative experience, but is
a knowledgeable defense expert who criticized britain's commitment to
the skybolt missile as far back as 1960 . his most impressive
endorsement came last week from the prestigious economist, which argued
that criticisms of his quick temper and impatience with technical
detail " could also have been levied against winston churchill . "
unlike gaitskell, whose political philosophy was based on an
essentially out-of-date view of an " insular and downtrodden england, "
argued the weekly, brown's socialism is that " of an age when
intelligent thrusters have learned to look forward in opportunity . " /
little harold . " labor's left wing supports harold wilson, 46, an
adroit, urbane debater and topnotch intellect who was an oxford
economics don at 21 . as president of the board of trade in clement
attlee's cabinet, pipe-puffing yorkshireman wilson has had more
administrative experience than any of his rivals, is the party's
foreign policy specialist . despite his brilliance and charm, wilson's
foes, who call him " little harold, " regard him as a slippery
opportunist who backs only winning causes though he miscalculated in
1960 when he attempted to grab the leadership while gaitskell was
fighting for his political life against the party's powerful anti-nato
bloc . brown defeated wilson for the deputy leadership, 133 to 103,
last year . but this time brown has an added challenge : james
callaghan, 50, who also has strong middle-road and right-wing support .
a naval petty officer's son who would have been chancellor of the
exchequer in a gaitskell cabinet, " stoker " callaghan is a hard-boiled
debater and effective tv performer, but is regarded by many colleagues
as a lightweight . to prepare for the chancellorship, he has been
cramming with some of oxford's brightest young dons, who privately rate
him " b or b-plus . " he is an engaging, hard-working politician, and
many of brown's supporters fear that he may split the right-wing vote .
in a deadlock, he could even emerge as labor's leader . foe's woes .
the choice of an effective opposition leader has seldom seemed more
important to the labor party or to the nation particularly since
governmental power in britain has in recent years increasingly moved
from the commons and the cabinet into the hands of the prime minister .
admittedly, the likelihood of a labor prime minister in the near future
has been dimmed by gaitskell's death . on the other hand, the tories
have little immediate cause for confidence : on top of charles de
gaulle's brusque rejection of the government's bid for common market
membership, unemployment the most crucial issue in british politics
today has jumped an alarming 25 per cent in one month, reaching a
16-year record of 814,632 (partly due to layoffs in the bitter winter
weather) . labor's leader will probably not be chosen until
mid-february . laborites hoped that tory setbacks would give them time
to develop a winning personality who could keep their party united .
