turkey just any government at all turkey seems to be in the grip
of a perpetual crisis . after the army toppled the corrupt,
free-spending regime of premier adnan menderes in 1960 and executed
him, the military ruled ineffectually for 18 months, then let civilians
take over . durable ismet inonu became premier, decided to try to hold
the country together amidst the lingering bitterness without curbing
parliamentary democracy . probably no one else could have done it .
inonu, 80, seemed like an embodiment of turkey's past : born under the
sultanate, he was one of kemal ataturk's most dashing revolutionary
generals, first became prime minister in 1923, served on and off as
premier or president of turkey for 40 years . yet last week inonu was
again fighting to save turkey from new political turmoil . new dilemma
. inonu and his people's republican party inaugurated overdue reforms,
but these did not necessarily make him popular . bureaucrats were
angered by his campaign against waste . businessmen and big landowners
were incensed by new schemes to make them pay taxes . plain consumers
were mad at the attempt to put government monopolies on a profitmaking
basis, which raised prices . peasants, who still would rather have new
mosques than new schools, hankered for the old days when menderes built
8,000 village shrines . menderes' heirs in the justice party kept
gaining ground with their strange mixture of aging leaders forever
trotting out the ghost of the dead leader and young politicians forever
promising that they could run things more efficiently than inonu . in
last month's nationwide municipal elections, inonu was plainly
overconfident . while justice party leader ragip gumuspala, 66,
campaigned strenuously, covering thousands of miles a week, inonu
loftily limited his politicking to a single 20-minute radio speech .
the results gave inonu's republicans only 37 per cent of the vote ;
two smaller parties in inonu's shaky government coalition were
virtually wiped out . the winner was the justice party, with 46 per
cent of the ballots . last week inonu resigned . his dilemma : neither
major party can rule separately, since each lacks a parliamentary
majority, and neither wants to rule jointly, since that experiment was
tried once before, lasted seven months and accomplished nothing . none
of the smaller parties seem eager to join another coalition, either .
new national elections ? nobody is enthusiastic over that idea . try
again . for the time being, at least, the army was sticking to its
pledge of political neutrality, but no one could be sure how long the
military would resist the idea of restoring " stability " by staging
another takeover . by week's end turkey's president, general cemal
gursel, came to inonu and asked him to form a new cabinet ;
conceivably, he might succeed, by persuading one of the small parties
to join a coalition and picking up enough defectors elsewhere to scrape
up a parliamentary majority . after all, inonu's immediate aim was not
a stable government, but any government at all .
