the scarlet epidemic " it used to be that
half the passengers on the metro wore the legion of honor, " crack
parisians . " now the only ones who still bother to wear it are the
conductors . " today, some 300,000 frenchmen and several thousand
foreigners are entitled to the legion's lapel emblem, ! and charles
de gaulle, who as president of france is grand master of the legion, is
anxious to make the list more exclusive . de gaulle has recently
approved a decree reducing the number of annual awards by 20 per cent .
through normal attrition, the government hopes the legion will have
dwindled to 125,000 in ten years . everyone bites . the order was
founded by napoleon in 1802 to reward those who " by their knowledge,
their virtue, their talent " upheld the glory of the republic, in which
all titles and honors had been abolished . " people call them baubles,
/ said napoleon . " very well, it is with baubles that you lead men .
there must be distinction but the legion soon lost its distinctiveness
miners and postmen, shopkeepers, policemen, and even the official
elysee palace silver polisher were garlanded along with poets,
generals, industrialists and diplomats in 1887 the president of france
was forced to resign because his son-in-law was selling legion
appointments for $3,000 apiece . one premier of the third republic,
pierre-maurice rouvier, casually made his mistress' husband a
legionnaire because " of the special services rendered to me by his
wife . " once when he was having bad luck fishing, legend has it,
author henri murger (la vie de boheme) baited his hook with his scarlet
ribbon and said : " now they are sure to bite . this is something
everyone likes . " money is better . as the " scarlet epidemic "
spread, it became more distinguished to reject than to accept the award
. degas, de maupassant, clemenceau, gide, sartre and camus all
allegedly turned the legion down . offered the medal in lieu of payment
for his famed requiem commissioned by the government, composer hector
berlioz snorted : " to hell with your legion of honor . i want my
money . " but a refusal cannot be worn in a buttonhole, and thousands
of other frenchmen still openly court the award . to restore
to our first national order the prestige it should have, " de
gaulle's government last week formally established a second-ranking
decoration known as the order of merit . henceforth, the legion of
honor will be awarded only for " eminent service . " merely /
distinguished service " will be rewarded with the new order of merit,
whose lapel ribbons and rosettes will look like the legion's, except
that the color will be blue .
an inconspicuous scarlet ribbon for chevaliers
of the legion (by far the majority), a rosette for
officers, rosette on silver ribbon for commanders, rosette on gold and
silver ribbon for grand officers, rosette on gold ribbon for those
awarded the grand-croix .
