italy's new partnership
/ this is oil and water, " cracked italy's new
foreign minister giuseppe saragat . the new center-left coalition,
outgrowth of the apertura a sinistra (opening to the left) which
started almost two years ago, last week finally managed to form a
cabinet . in addition to the premiership, the christian democrats wound
up with 15 of the 26 cabinet positions, including the key ministries of
defense, treasury, and internal affairs . along with the vice
premiership, the left-wing socialists got five more posts, the only
important one being the budget ministry . four cabinet jobs went to the
solidly anti-communist social democrats (including saragat's foreign
ministry) and the moderate republicans . italy's 25th cabinet in 20
years joins parties of different aims into an alliance based on what
each side hopefully takes to be expediency : the christian democrats
want socialist support for a far-ranging package of reforms ; the
socialists want to exercise power after 16 years in political exile .
as oddly matched as the parties themselves are their two leaders, for
the foreseeable future the key political figures in italy .
premier aldo moro, 47, is
the antithesis of the voluble, emotional italian . a reserved onetime
law professor, he detests the acid name calling of italian politics, is
so shy that he often travels by car to avoid the necessary social
amenities on planes and trains . moro's political genius is for
compromise, sometimes achieved by pure tenacity . he once reduced a
colleague to near collapse by arguing reasonably for four uninterrupted
hours . so conscientiously capable is moro of seeing all sides of every
question that friends and foes alike are convinced that he agrees only
with them . moro's colorless caution was the very quality that boosted
him to political prominence . five years ago, after sharp-tongued
amintore fanfani quit in a huff as christian democratic leader in a
dispute over his then still heavily opposed plans for an opening to the
left party elders looked for a replacement . he had to be a man nobody
was mad at, and moro filled the bill . although fanfani later became
premier for more than two years, moro stayed on as the party's chief
strategist . no less vigorous than fanfani in his advocacy of the
center-left alliance, moro at the same time was more militantly
anti-communist than fanfani and therefore proved far more persuasive
when it came to selling conservative christian democrats on the scheme
. prophetically, moro had once tried to join the socialist party but
was turned down as being " too catholic . " a devout churchgoer who
attends mass daily, he was born in lecce in the heel of italy's boot,
studied law at the university of bari, at 24 began teaching . entering
parliament in 1946, the newcomer was nicknamed by his colleagues " the
quaker " because of his dour outlook and austere habits . through sheer
diligence, moro became under secretary for foreign affairs in 1948,
received his own ministry (justice) in 1955 . however, his speeches as
a politician sounded as if he were still addressing law students at
bari, contained so many pedantic abstractions that deciphering his
meanings gave rise to a whole new group of experts known as "
morologists . /
married, father of
four daughters and one son, moro lives unpretentiously in a
lower-middle-class apartment district in rome . his wife, who almost
never appears in public with him, owns few fancy furs or jewels .
outside of his family, moro's only nonpolitical passion is flowers,
which he raises at a small country house about 30 miles froom rome . "
there, " he says, " i am perfectly at ease because i am with my
children and my roses . " vice premier pietro nenni, 72, is as
impulsive as moro is deliberate . while moro achieves agreement through
patience, nenni often gets his way by sheer charm and eloquence . in
more than half a century, his career has followed innumerable twists
and turns . even as a youth in romagna, in italy's rugged north, nenni
was an adept at political expediency . after his peasant parents died,
he was placed in an orphanage by an aristocratic family . every sunday
nenni recited his catechism before the countess and if he did well
received a silver coin . " generous but humiliating, " he recalled . he
became a socialist and befriended a fellow romagnan named benito
mussolini . il duce's fascist thugs later almost shot nenni when they
raided and burned his socialist headquarters in milan . nenni fled to
france, and during the next 17 years fought on the loyalist side in
spain, was captured by the nazis in occupied france during world war
ii, turned over to italian police, and deported to the lonely island of
ponza in the tyrrhenian sea in 1943 . three days after nenni arrived,
the shortlived government of marshal badoglio shipped another exile to
ponza : mussolini . nenni made his way to rome, became foreign
minister and vice premier in a coalition cabinet that included
communists . with a beret pushed to the back of his head and his bull
voice roaring, nenni demanded " unity of the working class, "
faithfully backed moscow . stalin rewarded him with a peace prize in
1951 . slowly nenni realized that the socialists were captives of the
italian communists . yet he could not escape without shattering his
party, which was heavily infiltrated by reds . finally, moscow's brutal
crushing of the hungarian rebellion and khrushchev's destalinization
speech in 1956 gave nenni the chance he was looking for : he broke his
/ action pact " with the communists, although the party still preserved
close ties with them . nenni also returned the stalin prize money
($25,000), which he had used to buy a luxurious seaside villa . in
rome, nenni lives more modestly in an apartment with his wife and one
of his three daughters, giuliana, a socialist senator . in frail health
he fell in a mountain stream 17 months ago and injured his head nenni
needed all his powers to persuade his sharply divided party to enter
the center-left coalition . at least for the time being, nenni has
lived down the boast he uttered 16 years ago : " not even a revolver
pressed against my head will make me break with the communists . /
