south viet nam end of the glow one criticism brought against
president ngo dinh diem was that he kept some of his best officers in
noncombat jobs for political reasons . one promise made by diem's
successors was to appoint aggressive new commanders and give them a
free hand . last week the first such new commander found himself sacked
and ordered to a desk exile that even diem had not thought of military
attache in formosa . five days after the coup, colonel pham van dong,
44, was placed in command of the 7th division, responsible for two
provinces south of saigon . in his first twelve days on the job, dong
launched seven major operations, but then the viet cong regained the
initiative . when one village near the capital was severely shelled and
several people were killed, the villagers complained bitterly . even
though such attacks are standard, the generals in saigon fired dong, to
the disappointment of u.s . advisers . but why transfer him 1,400 miles
away ? according to one version, dong had been too friendly with the
ruling junta's ambitious no . 3 man, major general ton that dinh, whom
some of his colleagues consider potentially troublesome . room at the
top . as the revolutionary glow that followed diem's overthrow fades,
south viet nam's generals seem to be watching each other ever more
alertly . they now often wrangle over policy in marathon debates that
last until 5 a.m . bureaucracy also takes its toll of leadership .
brigadier general le van kim, a top strategist, is occupied by
administrative chores ; last week one of his staff's chief projects
was requisitioning three typewriters . near by, general dinh flopped
back in his chair, groused that the pile of paper on his desk grows
higher each day . u.s . officials maintain that the generals are
quietly accomplishing much beneath the surface ; considered an
important achievement is the junta's start at winning over the hoa hao
and cao dai sects, many of whose members had collaborated with the viet
cong . but the junta chairman, lieut . general duong van ( " big " )
minh, seems reluctant to wield power, and the outsized, 22-member
military revolutionary council has taken few outwardly bold steps .
reported time correspondent murray gart : " none of this proves that
the generals cannot do the job of running south viet nam . it is too
soon to tell . but for the moment, there is a power vacuum at the top
in a country at war . " in saigon, there were new suicides by fire, the
first since the coup and virtually ignored in comparison to the
relentlessly publicized buddhist suicides under diem . a 17-year-old
girl, bach tri nga, drenched herself with gasoline and touched a match
to her skirts before the local residences of the international control
commission, set up in 1954 to oversee viet nam's partition . a
22year-old unemployed pedicab driver cremated himself half a block from
the u.s . ambassador's residence, and a young telephone operator
followed suit (he left a note saying he had been rejected by his
father) . the charred skeleton of a third victim, an older man, was
found near a suburban graveyard . authorities insisted that the men
acted out of personal despondency but conceded that the girl may have
had pro-communist propaganda in mind a farewell note repeated the
neutralist line against " vietnamese fighting vietnamese . " all the
way home . the fighting itself continued intensely and inconclusively .
sixty miles northwest of the capital, the viet cong poured a terrifying
150 rounds of mortar and recoilless rifle fire into the lonely outpost
of bauco, then overran two of its three blockhouses . of the 60
defenders, 18 died, 21 were wounded and 21 captured . also found
sprawled dead within the post : 16 women and children . the government
chased the attackers in an operation involving 3,000 men, but the
guerrillas vanished . five more americans apparently lost their lives a
sergeant shot in an ambush and four airmen aboard an rb-26 that crashed
into the mekong river . the u.s., nevertheless, went ahead with plans
to bring home 1,000 troops from viet nam by new year's chiefly
noncombat technicians, many of whose duties are being assumed by
vietnamese . at saigon airport last week, the initial 294 u.s.-bound
servicemen, many happily bearing lipstick smears from saigon sweeties,
clambered aboard four c-135 jets . present to see the first men off
were u.s . general paul d . harkins and south viet nam's defense
minister lieut . general tran van don . said don of the departing
americans : " they have shared our hardships and sorrows, and nothing
can repay them for the sacrifices they have made . /
