thailand alas, poor elephas ! he's losing class when
king bhumibol adulyadej last week celebrated his 36th birthday a
particularly significant anniversary to thais, who measure life in
twelve-year cycles traditionalists were saddened not to find a single
royal elephant taking part in the elaborate ceremonies . in thailand,
as elsewhere in asia, the once enormous importance of the elephant has
declined drastically . while elephant ownership is still considered
prestigious, a new cadillac or mercedes (the king owns several of each)
now rates far higher as a status symbol than a mature, 15-year-old
elephas maximus with 40 years of rugged mileage ahead of him . no
parking . thailand now has fewer than 10,000 registered working
elephants v . some 150,000 automobiles . says one old-school thai : "
oh, yes, rich men still use elephants, but only when they go into the
forest to work . where friends can see them, they ride automobiles
instead . " while the used-elephant market has been seriously depressed
by automation, a mahout-maintained model with bucket seat, two-tone
umbrella and stick shift costs up to 1,500 f.o.b . bangkok, or about
$4,000 delivered at the bronx zoo . in thailand a u-ride-it elephant
is still a bargain at $2.50 a day (one tenth as much as a rented truck)
and is still hard to beat when it comes to bird watching, spraying
treetops or hauling logs . but it is impossible to find pachyderm
parking space in bangkok . shrugs a taxicab mahout : " elephant too
much fighting, too much kicking, too much eating . i like plymouth .
plymouth only takes gas one time a day . " white model nostalgic thais
recall the glorious days when siam's elephant corps was its dreaded
force de frappe. as a member of seato, thailand nowadays sets more
store by its u.s . supply tanks . nonetheless, allows colonel
damnern lekhakul, a military historian attached to the thai general
staff, " if a war comes, we may have to rely on elephants for jungle
combat or if we run out of gas . " most thais also still believe,
with edward topsell, an early 17th century bestiarist, that the
elephant is a " great and ample demonstration of the power and wisdom
of almighty god " particularly the white variety . king bhumibol has
democratically quartered his own nine-year-old white model in the
bangkok zoo . there, when he reaches maturity in a few years, the
handsome specimen may become the first white elephant ever to be mated
in captivity . they insist to
this day that abraham lincoln should have accepted their king mongkut's
timely offer of elephants in 1862 . regretfully, lincoln explained to
the king that the u.s . climate did not " favor the multiplication of
the elephant . " it is possible, nonetheless, that if the union had
been able to field a pachyderm panzer division, the u.s . civil war
might have been foreshortened .
