sikkim from debutante to the deities as a debutante and a
sarah lawrence graduate (in oriental studies), hope cooke had a crush on
central asia . her dreams seemed to come romantically true last march
when she married sikkim's crown prince palden thondup namgyal in a
now-legendary ceremony at the capital city of gangtok (time, march 23)
. last week, when the crown prince's 70-year-old father, maharajah sir
tashi namgyal, died of cancer in a calcutta nursing home, hope and her
husband mounted the throne of the mountain-locked himalayan kingdom .
the formal coronation will take place after one year's mourning, the
precise date to be calculated by the court astrologers . private
mountain . the land where hope will rule is so small that its 2,748 sq
. mi . and 162,000 people could fit comfortably into a u.s . national
park like yellowstone . the new maharajah personally owns kanchenjunga
which, at 28,146 ft., is the third tallest mountain in the world and
probably the world's most majestic when its snowy peaks are lit by the
sunrise and borne aloft on lacy clouds . sikkim contains every variety
of climate and plant, from the subtropical through the temperate to the
arctic . snow leopards prowl the himalayan slopes, pandas frolic in the
forested gorges, clouds of butterflies hover over 3,000 different kinds
of rhododendron and 400 types of orchid . wedged between tibet and
india, sikkim usually has been tributary to one or another of its
neighbors . when india won its independence from britain in 1947, so
did sikkim . but to the late maharajah, freedom brought more problems
than profit . one day in 1949, several thousand peasants swarmed around
the blue and white royal palace (actually a large bungalow) demanding
an elected national council and tax reforms . tashi submitted to the
experiment in democracy for 29 days and then, feeling unable to cope
with what was called " threatened disorder, " asked india's nehru for
help . nehru sent in troops and a dewan, or political officer . ever
since, india has handled sikkim's foreign affairs and defense .
,alarmed nude . in recent years, tashi retired into a private life that
consisted largely of prayer and painting he specialized in misty
sikkimese landscapes, and painted one " vision " of the abominable
snowman, who is pictured as a skinny, jet-black animal with a red face
scampering over a snowy summit carrying a nude, pink-skinned lady with
an alarmed expression . tashi conversed with spirits, who are
prevalent in sikkim, looked out at the world through green-tinted
glasses, and seemed fashioned of gold, so stiff and heavy were his
brocaded robes . the maharajah was educated in india, is fluent in five
languages including english, and is said to be a reincarnation of his
uncle, who was a revered lama . " aren't we all reincarnations of a
sort ? ' ? he asks politely, evidently is more interested in
agriculture and atomic energy than in the miraculous . he hopes that
sikkim can earn dollars abroad by adding copper to its current exports
of cardamom seeds, oranges, and imitation scotch whisky made by a
parsi distiller from bombay . when he was proclaimed maharajah last
week, palden thondup outlined a program worthy of socialist
scandinavia, declaring that " jointly and steadfastly we shall reach
our goal of freedom from want, disease and illiteracy, and usher in a
welfare state so that sikkim can enjoy her rightful place under the sun
. " the new maharani hope, who is called lhachem kusho (consort of the
deities) by her subjects, intends eventually to write a history of
sikkim . in preparation, she is learning two of the nation's most
important languages, bhutia and nepali . the project is dexlayed by her
duties to the royal household of 20 servants and three aides-de-camp she
will undoubtedly be further delayed by the fact that she expects a baby
this spring one event whose timing will not be controlled by sikkim's
ubiquitous astrologers .
