burma not much left to nationalize burma's dictator ne win, 52,
must hate getting up in the morning . what he rises to face each day is
a nation of 22 million people plagued by at least five separate
rebellions, ranging from the kachin tribesmen, who want autonomy, to
the red flag communists, who are so fanatical that they think even
china's mao tse-tung is " too moderate . " burmese businessmen bitterly
resent the nationalization of industry ; peasants grumble at the
collectivization of agriculture ; buddhist monks protest that
government expropriation of the rich robs them of endowments . ne win's
latest enemies are the students who, spurred on by the communists, last
week staged demonstrations and riots all over the country . safe
conduct . during the past four months, ne win has desperately tried to
make peace with burma's assorted rebels . he guaranteed safe conduct
for political and tribal leaders from and to their swamp and jungle
hideouts . results were discouraging . ne win complained that the
rebels particularly the communists only wanted to buy time in which to
regroup, rearm and prepare new offensives . he broke off the talks, let
the leaders return to their jungle camps and then began a police
roundup of 1,400 leftists of all shades . to prove he had civilian
support somewhere, ne win had army trucks pick up some 20,000 workers
for a " spontaneous " rally in rangoon . at that point the students
went into action, led an assault on the rally, throwing stones, ripping
up placards and setting one army truck afire to shouts of, " we don't
want this government ! " when ne win ordered the closing down of
rangoon university last week, the students, led by leftist agitators,
barricaded the gates and staged a sit-in . bulldozers ordered out to
smash the barricades were beaten back with hurled stones, and fire
hoses failed because of insufficient water pressure . finally, tough
riot police with tear gas dislodged the students . three other
universities at bassein, moulmein and mandalay were padlocked by the
government . shaven head . ne win's only visible support remains the
50,000-man burmese army, but there is evidence that even this last
bulwark is being undermined ; popular brigadier aung gyi, who
disagrees with ne win's policies, is in exile in a buddhist monastery
where, his head shaven, he spends his time meditating . at week's end
the student turmoil continued, and insurgents stepped up their attacks
on police outposts and army convoys . in heavily guarded government
house, ne win was still hard at work pushing his headlong, headstrong
course toward socialism . last week he nationalized 17 more private
organizations, including the automobile association of burma and a
tailors association . after all, there's not much left to nationalize
not even the red cross or the boy scouts, both of which were taken over
months ago .
