guinea trouble in erewhon " an african statesman, " allows
guinea's president sekou toure, " is not a naked boy begging from rich
capitalists . " on the contrary, many of his country's well-dressed
officials own sumptuous villas and cars, favor french food, american
cigarettes and scotch whisky (at $18 a bottle) . conakry, guinea's
sweltering capital, has plans for two new luxury hotels one to be built
by the u.s., the other by the russians . but guinea (pop . 3,300,000),
once one of french west africa's richest countries, after five years of
independence has become one of the poorest . this week, a mission
headed by economic development minister ismael toure, sekou's
half-brother, is due in washington, expected to plead with the
administration to double the $15 million in aid that the u.s . has
funneled into guinea this year . sears, with credit . despite
diversified agriculture and abundant natural resources (notably,
bauxite, iron, diamonds), strongman toure's blend of xenophobia and
socialism saddled the country with severe food shortages, inflation and
gaping trade deficits . the trouble, as one western visitor puts it, is
that guinea's government has long viewed foreign aid as " one big
sears, roebuck store, with unlimited credit . " alone among france's
black african territories, guinea chose total independence rather than
charles de gaulle's offer of continued " association . " when french
aid was cut off, toure turned instinctively to the soviet bloc, whose
economic embrace rapidly made guinea a kind of cold-war erewhon . in
return for its prized pineapples, bananas and other produce, moscow
sent tropical guinea overpriced, superannuated snowplows, prefabricated
housing units that its workmen cannot assemble, and a plant to produce
shaved ice, which melts instantly in conakry's savage heat . as
elsewhere, the communists concentrated on showy prestige projects, such
as a sports stadium (still unfinished after three years), a vast brick
factory, a printing plant capable of producing 40,000 newspapers an
hour, though at most one in ten guineans can read . experts discovered
that a russian-built radio station, designed to beam the voice of toure
the length of africa, had been sited on an iron lode that badly
interferes with transmission . miffed mammies . toure learned to fear
russians bearing gifts . soviet loans petered out soon after he
expelled the russian ambassador for fomenting anti-toure demonstrations
in 1961 in one of his more astute aidmanship gambits, he later snubbed
moscow by strengthening his ties with peking, whose technicians have
already built a match factory and a cigarette plant . but
russian/dictated " reforms " and toure's own policies persisted . on
moscow's urging, toure had divorced guinea's currency from france's
monetary system, flooded the country with new paper francs embellished
with his portrait, which were almost valueless outside guinea . as a
result, cattle, coffee and bananas and u.s . food for peace supplies
were smuggled into neighboring countries to be sold for hard currenny .
toure also nationalized virtually every business in guinea, including
the once-lucrative diamond mines . soon every commodity from tap water
to beer-bottle caps was in short supply . once-docile guineans reacted
by staging an angry series of food riots this year . though toure
prides himself on his emancipation of womenfolk he has also insisted
that traditionally bare-breasted banana porters cover up it was
guinea's vociferous market mammies miffed at perennial shortages and
soaring
prices, who finally forced the president to make his first drastic
economic reforms by threatening to march on conakry . fearful that he
might be overthrown, toure last october hastily dismantled dozens of
state monopolies and allowed private retailers to buy up their stocks .
in repeated broadcasts, he confessed that his nationalization of the
economy had been a colossal flop . said he : " the private trader has
a greater sense of responsibility than civil servants, who get paid at
the end of each month and only once in a while think of the nation or
their own responsibility . " but western businessmen are wondering
whether toure's apparent conversion to free enterprise is sincere and
whether it comes too late to do much good .
