nato nagging in moments of grave crisis, nato is a model of
arm-in-arm harmony . but when there are no berlin blockades or cuban
missiles to bring out their underlying unity, the western allies are
divided . there is little doubt anywhere that the u.s . has crushing
nuclear superiority over the russians . disagreement arises over the
questions of 1) how much of a voice europe is to have as to when and
how this u.s . force is to be applied, and 2) what western strategy
should be in the intermediate grey area short of total war, an area in
which nato is perhaps more important politically than militarily .
these problems swirled up again this week as the foreign and defense
ministers of 15 nato nations sat down for their big annual review
conference in paris . massive or flexible . for the record, the agenda
was crowded with distant general matters : what next in disarmament
talks with russia ? what meaning for the west in the sino-soviet
split ? but in a kind of corridor warfare and in separate bilateral
meetings, some factions tried to maneuver the u.s . into giving europe
more say in the use of the h-bomb, and others looked for ways to
frustrate charles de gaulle's force de dissuasion . under u.s . urging,
secretary-general dirk stikker (ailing and probably due for early
retirement) is carrying out sweeping studies to reassess nato force
levels and basic strategy . the french have been working against the "
stikker studies . " clinging to their own massive retaliation theory,
which holds that any aggression in europe must turn into a nuclear war,
de gaulle's men sneer at
washington's concept of " balanced " conventional-and-nuclear forces to
provide a " flexible response " to red moves . force or farce . paris
is equally skeptical of washington's proposed multilateral force ( "
multilateral farce, " the french call it) . so are most of the other
allies . but at least a few are beginning to believe that the idea
surface ships armed with polaris weapons and manned by mixed crews from
various nato nations just might work. no one has any other practical
or even impractical plan to give europe a greater share in the use of
the bomb . from the rational french viewpoint, the sense of " sharing "
provided by mlf would be an illusion, since the u.s . would still
retain control of the missiles themselves . but lyndon johnson has
hinted that this control might be transferred to the europeans if and
when europe truly unites . there were other nato problems and squabbles
: the command structure is badly outdated, and the western big three
are too heavily represented on nato staffs at the expense of other
allies . one concrete accomplishment : agreement to set up a $308
million electronic system stretching from norway to turkey that will
provide quick identification and control for such fastmoving new
aircraft as the f-104 . its less than martial name : nadge (nato air
defense ground environment) .
skeptics were reminded that nelson's flagship
victory at trafalgar in 1805 was manned by 16 different nationalities .
