espionage a blonde bond he planted a long, passionate kiss on my
lips and pressed my back against the door until i was limp . then he
swung me easily off the floor and started to carry me up the stairs . "
charles, " i remonstrated feebly, " what are you doing ? " he looked
at me hungrily . " just point out your bedroom, " he said . " you have
nothing to fear, cherie . " as a lover, charles brousse was the most
ardent of all those i met in my career as a spy . . . despite the
bottled-in-bond flavor, the scene actually took place in wartime
washington . it was recounted recently in london's the people by its
heroine, a mata hari from minnesota who worked for british intelligence
under the code name cynthia . her real name : elizabeth pack . using
the boudoir as ian fleming's hero uses a beretta, she was described by
her wartime boss as " the greatest unsung heroine of the war . " after
the war cynthia married her onetime prey, the ardent charles, and with
him retreated to a remote 10th century french chateau where she died
last week, at 53, of throat cancer . scuppered admiral . when world war
ii broke out, blonde, green-eyed cynthia had been married for nine
years to arthur pack, a colorless british diplomat who was nearly twice
her age . the daughter of a u.s . marine corps colonel, at 29 she was
adventurous, astute, attractive and, from diligent years on europe's
diplomatic circuit, already an old hand at affairs of state . leaving
her husband, she returned to the u.s . shortly after the fall of
france, immediately joined british security coordination (b.s.c.), the
manhattanbased intelligence and counterespionage network that was run
by sir william stephenson, the famed " quiet canadian . " he sent
cynthia to washington, where she took a georgetown house on o street
and went to work . cynthia's first big assignment was enough to daunt
the wiliest old pro : her orders were to get hold of the italian naval
code book . within a few weeks of first meeting the shapely betty pack,
italy's naval attache, admiral alberto lais, was so scuppered by her
that he surrendered the code with hardly a murmur . italian apologists
maintain that lais, who died in 1951, was actually so ungallant as to
give his mistress a fake cipher book . undeniably, however, british
intelligence thereafter proved uncannily adept at forestalling italian
fleet movements, notably in the march 1941 sea battle off greece's cape
matapan, where the royal navy crippled italy's numerically superior
force . outwitted watchman . for the u.s . as well as britain,
cynthia's most valuable coup was to capture the secret code used by the
vichy government's diplomatic missions as well as the french fleet,
which might otherwise have taken thousands of allied lives during the
invasion of north africa . posing as a washington newshen, cynthia had
already seduced the dashing captain brousse, then the press attache in
the petain government's washington embassy ; by playing on his hatred
of the nazis, she made him a willing ally . " i was not just indulging
his desires so as to get him to disclose military and diplomatic
intelligence, " wrote cynthia . " i was fulfilling a deep need of my
own . " brousse more than satisfied her bosses' needs as well by
supplying daily copies of all french diplomatic cables . in 1942, when
the embassy's naval attache proved seducible but obdurately pro-vichy,
brousse even agreed to help her filch the code books from the attache's
office so that they could be copied and returned to the embassy safe
unnoticed . their tactics were exquisitely gallic . charles showed up
at the embassy with cynthia one night and, rustling a few dollar bills,
whispered to the understanding watchman that mme . brousse was
suspicious of their liaison (she was, indeed, and later divorced him) .
the embassy, brousse explained to the guard, was the only place where
he and his girl could rendezvous, and they soon became regular visitors
. on the night they planned to lift the code, with the help of a
safebreaker called the georgia cracker, they put the watchman to sleep
with drugged champagne, only to find that the locks were so tough that
they had to complete the job a few nights later . by now, they guessed
that the night watchman must suspect that it was not just amour they
were after . sure enough, soon after cynthia and her lover entered the
darkened office, the door burst open and the watchman studied them
under a powerful flashlight . finally, he blurted, " i beg your pardon,
madame, a thousand times, " and fled down the corridor . before going
to work on the safe, cynthia had taken the simple precaution of
removing all her clothes .
