russia better things for better living through chemistry ? /
utopians think that science can transform the atlantic ocean into
lemonade, " snorted karl marx's co-worker, friedrich engels . yet who
should be serving up lemonade last week than that old realist nikita
khrushchev . in the kremlin's marble-halled palace of the congresses,
addressing the communist party central committee and more than 5,000
other comrades, nikita promised that one great force would miraculously
straighten out the soviet economic mess : big chemistry . between 1964
and 1970, khrushchev announced, the regime will spend $46 billion to
expand the soviet chemical industry about the same amount that now goes
annually into all domestic economic development . where would the
additional money come from ? khrushchev hinted at a radical reduction
in military spending . more important, he admitted that russia would
need credit and supplies, including entire factories, from the west but
not, he fumed, at " fabulous profits " to the capitalists . brave talk
. plans call for building 200 new plants and modernizing 500 old ones
; since much of the new production will be plastics and synthetic
fibers, soviet citizens may at last find it easier to buy such simple
items as nylon stockings and linoleum flooring . " for the first time
in all the 46 years of soviet power, " said nikita in a remarkable
confession, the party and the state can do something about " satisfying
the requirements of the people . " moreover, new products must show
better design, because it is " no longer possible to tolerate " russian
consumer goods that " look less smart than foreign articles . " an even
more urgent task for big chemistry is the production of chemical
fertilizer . its output, promised khrushchev, would be quadrupled from
20 million tons this year to 80 million tons by 1970 . this would
permit russia to catch up with the u.s., for u.s . farm surpluses are
not the result of any " special american wisdom, " khrushchev insisted
; it is just that the u.s . uses almost twice as much fertilizer as
the soviet union on about half the acreage . through all this brave
talk ran the admission of russia's disastrous agricultural failures .
one arresting figure : although acreage increased 7 per cent since
last year, yield actually dropped 20 per cent . if anyone was inclined
to criticize this failure, or the costly palliative of buying grain
from the west, khrushchev had the standard answer . remember how
bad things
were under stalin . in 1947, to earn foreign exchange, stalin and
molotov actually sold grain abroad while in a number of areas " people
had bloated stomachs or even died from lack of food . " it was the
first time moscow had admitted that starvation took place in the soviet
union since the forced collectivization of the early 1930s . bulging
warehouses . following khrushchev's 4f-hour speech, other communist
bigwigs shook the audience with a series of angry complaints . most
collective farmers do not know the first thing about using chemical
fertilizer ; the ukraine is planning a crash program to educate 4,000
/ skilled fertilizer appliers . " superphosphate fertilizer arrives at
the farms with only 20 per cent of the required chemical nutrients ;
the rest is worthless ballast that gets lumpy and heavy in the rain .
russia has an impressive 561 soil laboratories, but most of them have
only one or two employees and the wrong equipment . as for the chemical
industry itself, managers are still waiting for delivery of equipment
designed ten years ago . some of the products are so ungainly that they
pile up unsold in warehouses for instance, synthetic fur coats, which,
complained one speaker, " are so heavy that only well-trained athletes
can wear them . " only about 30 per cent of the workers in the industry
are engaged in production, while the rest are occupied with maintenance
or bureaucratic tasks . moreover, workers are underpaid and receive
only a fraction of the prescribed incentive bonuses . the matter of
personal incentives was clearly the key to the situation, both in
industry and agriculture . it is the very nature of collective farming
not the relatively superficial problem of fertilizer production that
accounts for the chronic crisis . as khrushchev's own figures showed,
peasants working on their tiny, private half-acre plots, which comprise
less than 1 per cent of the arable land, sell to the state 14 per cent
of the country's meat, 30 per cent of the eggs, and raise 65 per cent
of the cabbages and potatoes .
