thailand death of a man on a visit to thailand two years ago,
lyndon johnson said that the time had come for south east asia to /
separate the men from the boys " in its battle against communist
aggression . in every sense of the word, thailand's premier sarit
thanarat was a man . a bluff, hard-wenching, hard-drinking soldier,
sarit was also a masterly pro-western politician who stabilized
thailand's chaotic government and sagging economy, rooted out official
corruption and cracked down hard on communist infiltration . in the "
domino " view of southeast asia, according to which the collapse of one
country could knock over all the others, thailand alone stood firm,
surrounded by tottering neighbors laos, cambodia, viet nam, burma .
when sarit died last week at 55, the u.s . for the first time in five
years was forced to worry whether thailand would become another of
southeast asia's wavering dominoes . trick achieved . though marshal
sarit ruled thailand as an absolute dictator, he had a strong sense of
responsibility toward country and people . " anybody can stage a
revolution, " he said after seizing power in a bloodless coup in 1957 .
/ the trick, once the revolution has been staged, is winning public
approval . " on doctor's orders, he went on the wagon, began
housecleaning thailand from top to bottom . he banned opium smoking,
and when a rash of fires broke out in bangkok's business district one
winter, he ordered four chinese merchants shot a brutal but effective
reminder that the annual custom of burning shops to collect insurance
for the chinese new year was now taboo . sarit slashed the price of
rice, transportation and school fees, allocated as much money for
education as for defense . he encouraged foreign investment and
industrial expansion, had more than $500 million in foreign exchange
reserves socked away, spurred a healthy 6 per cent annual rise in the
g.n.p . when communist guerrillas stepped up their campaign of
subversion in the scrubby, impoverished northeast provinces, sarit set
in motion a crash $300 million program of medical, economic and
educational development that undercut the red threat . though his rule
was absolute, he always knelt before thailand's king bhumibol
adulyadej, encouraged thais to accept the king as head of state and
symbol of national unity . three weeks ago, sarit went to the hospital
with complications arising from cirrhosis of the liver and a lifetime
of hard living . among his other ailments : enlargement of the heart,
high blood pressure, kidney disease, congested lungs . from his
hospital bed, he sang to his wife an old thai ballad that begins : /
the love of 100 mistresses could not be compared to the love one has
for his own wife.' ? the u.s . army surgeon general rushed to bangkok
to treat sarit, but his heart finally gave out . the job ahead .
sarit's death occasioned national mourning and honors usually accorded
only to thailand's royal family . dressed in a field marshal's uniform,
sarit's body was placed on a bier in bangkok on the grounds of the
marble temple . thousands of mourners poured scented water from conch
shells over the corpse's extended right hand as a gesture of farewell
and as a plea for forgiveness for any grievance committed against the
dead man . then the body, folded in a fetal position, was put in an
ornate golden urn, where it will remain until it is cremated, probably
some time in the early spring . sarit's successor is former vice
premier and defense minister thanom kittikachorn, 52, a handsome,
amiable army general who served unimpressively as premier in 1958 when
sarit was laid up in a washington hospital . thanom was a close friend
of sarit's and a loyal supporter of his policies ; he immediately
appointed a new cabinet essentially the same as his predecessor's,
promised to follow sarit's pro-western, anti-communist policies . most
in his favor : he inherits a functioning government in which the army
provides power, the topflight civil service contributes administrative
ability, and the monarchy lends legitimacy to the whole . but
remembering thailand's shaky, pre-sarit past, in which coup followed
coup, thailand's most sophisticated leaders know that this system will
have to withstand a strong drift back to the old pattern . the thai
nation faces " a tremendous task, " says able foreign minister thanat
khoman . " it is, as you say in america, a hell of a job . /
