south viet nam back to
saigon this week, for the second time in three months, goes u.s .
defense secretary robert s . mcnamara . his aim : to size up south
viet nam's new regime, which was helped to power by the u.s . on the
theory that it would fight the war more effectively than the murdered
president diem, but which, so far at least, has provided disappointing
leedership . the war is still showing alarming drift, and the communist
guerrillas have shown signs of getting bolder . last week time
correspondent murray gart, to get his own look at the war, flew on 26
helicopter missions in five days (three of his choppers were hit by
gunfire), came away with the story of a plan for stepped-up aerial
strikes against the reds and some grim impressions of the fighting in
general . gart's report : at saigon
airport before dawn, a swarm of helicopters sputtered to life, their
whirling blades churning up misty contrails in the cool, damp air .
soon a formation of 13 " hueys " (uh-1bs) was airborne and droning away
at 2,000 ft . below, the light of day broke over the mekong delta,
turning rivers and canals into silvery ribbons among the green
paddyfields . inside the choppers, men long hardened to possible death
carefully crushed out their after-breakfast cigarettes . a mere fifteen
minutes out of saigon and directly south of the capital, the three lead
hueys, bristling with rockets and machine guns, buzzed the target area
; they hedge-hopped lines of foliage, hovered over huts, scrutinized
the paddy fields . " negative contact, " u.s . pilot captain dennis
boyle radioed to the main force, meaning no ground fire . the rest of
the fleet fluttered into the zone, and while armed craft circled
protectively, five " skinned " (unarmed) hueys alighted in a clearing
and disgorged 70 vietnamese troops . the soldiers swept through a
village, rounding up peasants suspected of being guerrillas ; some of
the men had been found crouching together, unable to explain why they
were not out in the fields working . one offered a soldier 1,000
piasters ($13.60) to set him free ; the soldier gladly accepted the
payoff, then tagged the captive with a white scarf identifying him as a
probable viet cong . shirts were stripped from backs to check for the
guerrilla's telltale marks of pack straps . forty-five minutes later,
the helicopters were headed back to saigon with a haul of 14 prisoners
. replacing terror . the operation, called an " eagle strike,
/ is a tactic by which the new government and its u.s . advisers hope
to add speed and initiative to anti-guerrilla operations . though such
strikes have long been used in viet nam for missions big and small, the
program now being launched aims to carry out smallscale,
search-and-seize missions as never before, especially in the heavily
infiltrated delta . for the first time the u.s . utility tactical
transport company based at saigon airport has been assigned " eagle
strikes " as a permanent duty . a u.s . major describes the operation
as " a reconnaissance force always seeking out the enemy, striking only
when contact is made or intelligence is good enough to make a landing
worthwhile . also, it is carried out by a small force, not one that
requires the movement of dozens of craft and battalions of men . "
brigadier general joseph w . stilwell jr., " vinegar joe's " son, who "
flies " a desk in saigon but who is always slipping out on chopper
missions, puts the tactical challenge in south viet nam in brutally
frank terms . " the problem, " says he, " is to replace viet cong
control of the countryside, which they maintain through murder, rape,
torture and terror, with something else . we don't use terror tactics .
the eagle strike is the best way to go after them, using the element of
complete surprise . but it is only one way, and we need others . "
after completing their crack-of-dawn mission last week the crews of the
13 hueys and the 70 vietnamese soldiers rested while their choppers
were being refueled, then were airborne again, heading for a
village just twelve miles south of saigon . this time one helicopter in
the first wave took a bullet in the fuselage, but the troop carriers
set down anyway . the soldiers found the village flying a viet cong
flag, rounded up 43 prisoners . back at the base (by now it was noon),
the eagles received a report that a viet cong company had been spotted
moving ten miles south of saigon and scrambled once more . over the
they ran into machine-gun fire, but silenced it with a fusillade of
rockets and bullets the vietnamese landed and rounded up whatever reds
had not managed to escape . private yalu . the helicopter
work requires steady nerves . one armed huey escorting a supply chopper
at an outpost on the plain of reeds west of saigon attacked a
machinegun nest that had opened fire . just before one rocket was
dropped, it was apparently struck by a sniper's bullet and blew up,
shattering the plane's plexiglas windows ; the gunner and the crew
chief suffered superficial but bloody face wounds . the dialogue over
the intercom betrayed no panic : " was a rocket blew up, wasn't it ?
/ it was somethin' . " / you o.k., o'shea .q? " / roger . " / anybody
else get hit ? " / you got a fat lip there, boy . " during another
mission, an aerial attack on two companies of viet cong dug into
foxholes hear the difficult-to-patrol cambodian border, some of the
ground fire came from across a river that separates viet nam from "
neutral " cambodia a river that one american adviser bitterly calls "
our own private yalu . " dismal scene . despite the attempt
at improved mobility, south viet nam's generals have yet to stage any
spectacular feats against the viet cong although they have plans on the
drawing boards, and government forces last week captured more weapons
than they lost for the first time in months . everywhere one travels,
and the only safe mode of travel is by helicopter, the countryside is a
dismal sight of actual or threatened viet cong control . in the delta
to the south, and in two or three provinces around saigon, there is no
doubt of who controls the boondocks . of mounting concern is the
communists' increased hold on vital long an province on saigon's
southern flank, where conditions have become precarious . a u.s .
adviser says wryly that there is no need in long an for the
government's plan to abolish some of the overextended outposts . " the
viet cong, " he says, " are doing that for us . " in a guerrilla war,
it is often impossible to tell who is winning . but in viet nam some
things do seem certain : many more lives will be tragically lost, the
war cannot possibly be won by 1965, and a rich jewel of a country
carved out of ancient indochina sees no end in sight to a decade of
red-instigated fighting . about the best that can be expected is to
maintain hope, apply muscle in the right places, make long-range
commitments, and retain a dogged determination to keep fighting . then
maybe, just maybe, events and the tide of battle will merge to keep
this piece of real estate from communist control .
