kenya uhuru is not enough the youth rally at nairobi
last week was interrupted by the sudden appearance of four rangy
africans . each was clad in animal skins, armed with sharp-bladed
pangas and wearing his hair in long braids smeared with red mud the
fighting insignia of the mau mau terrorists . the crowd fell silent as
the four approached the dais where sat prime minister jomo kenyatta and
his honored guest, prince philip, husband of britain's queen elizabeth
. with his lumbering, elephant walk, kenyatta descended from the dais,
pushed through his startled security guards, and greeted the mau mau .
/ kenya is free now, " he said . " there is no need to hide or fight .
/ peacefully, the four men surrendered their weapons . the ceremony .
although kenya's vicious mau mau long ago stopped fighting, many were
still hiding out in the green-black forests on the slopes of mount
kenya . all week they drifted back " field marshal " mwariama and 50
assorted " generals . " the foreign representatives arriving along with
the mau mau ranged from red china's foreign minister chen yi to india's
indira gandhi and u.s . interior secretary stewart udall . also from
the u.s., as guests and entertainers, came harry belafonte and miriam
makeba. there were balls, garden parties, receptions, the laying of
cornerstones, and the presentation of gifts . queen elizabeth gave
kenyatta the royal lodge at sagana ; the aga khan turned over to him
his own former residence ; a group of u.s . businessmen donated a
white lincoln continental . the climax came when kenyatta got into his
new car and was driven to uhuru stadium . at five minutes before
midnight, as kenyatta rose to take part in the flag-raising ceremony,
prince philip whispered jokingly to him, " are you sure you wouldn't
like to change your mind now ? " smiling, kenyatta shook his head
and, accompanied by britain's governor malcolm macdonald (who will stay
on as governor-general), walked to the two flagpoles in the center of
the stadium . in order to spare british onlookers all possible anguish,
kenyatta had tactfully ordered that the lights be dimmed during the
moment the union jack was lowered, and then blazed on again as kenya's
flag was raised . the new banner : black for the people, red for the
blood that has been shed, and green for the land, with thin white lines
inserted between the colors . the white, says kenyatta, is to ensure
that the flag represents all kenyans . slowly the banner of africa's
35th new state unfurled to wild cries of " uhuru ! " and the
explosion of fireworks . minutes later, word reached the stadium that a
team of climbers had reached the summit of mount kenya, planted the new
flag and lit flares that illuminated the sacred mountain " like a
fireball . " the problems . despite his estimated 73 years (he claims
not to be sure of his birth date), and frequent signs of fatigue,
kenyatta is still tall and broadshouldered, his eyes huge and piercing
. in his time he has been a farm boy, student, laborer, meter-reader,
respected anthropologist, headmaster, convicted terrorist and, for
decades, the unparalleled idol of millions of africans . the country he
now rules carries most of its old ills into independence . abroad, the
most immediate problem is a violent quarrel with kenya's northeastern
neighbor, somalia, which lays claim to the barren but extensive
northeastern region, inhabited by 200,000 somalis (see map) . to
diminish such quarrels, kenya is earnestly pushing an east african
federation of kenya with tanganyika and uganda, which would create a
nation of 25 million people and might eventually be extended to such
small states as zanzibar, nyasaland, rwanda and burundi .
internationally, kenya will, of course, be neutralist and accept aid
from both east and west .
independence brought about a
reunion of kenyatta's far-flung families . his english third wife, edna
may, and her 20-year-old son peter, a cambridge undergraduate, flew to
nairobi and were met by kenyatta's fourth wife, ngina, an african, and
his daughters margaret, 34, and jane, 14, by his first wife grace, also
an african . his second wife, whose name kenyatta refuses to divulge,
is said to have died about twelve years ago .
kenyatta himself has hardly shown
any communist sympathies, but his home minister, oginga odinga, is a
left-winger who has already set up a state news agency with russian and
czech help . he is perhaps balanced by justice minister tom mboya, who
is at present politically in the shade, but remains strongly
nationalist and generally pro-western . at home, kenyatta must reckon
with a population that is soaring at an annual rate of 3.4 per cent ,
and though the government intends within five years to settle 50,000
african families on a million acres in the " white highlands " bought
from european settlers with $80 million supplied by britain, by that
time an additional 100,000 families will be clamoring for land .
kenya's huge labor surplus must idly await the slow development of
industry, and there is a great lack of trained professionals to replace
the departing whites . for example, kenya has 750 doctors but needs at
least 9,000 . the outlook . painstakingly, kenyatta pleads with his
people to accept harambee, a swahili word meaning " pull together . "
he tells africans that they must concede full partnership to whites and
asians, and tells his own dominant kikuyu tribe that they must work
amiably with other tribes . the opposition kadu party, which elected
only 31 of the 130-member house of representatives, is falling apart as
more and more of its own representatives climb on the kenyatta
bandwagon, lured by government jobs and patronage . as a result, kenya
will probably become a typically african one-party state, but probably
not in so virulent a form as ghana or guinea . no one can ignore the
difficulties ahead the uneasiness of the remaining white settlers, the
fears of the asians who control most of the nation's commerce, the
age-old tribal rivalries that could explode into separatism or tribal
war . but the departing british are greatly impressed by kenyatta's
growing statesmanship . " only we can save ourselves, " he told his
people last week . " nobody else can save us . in the past we have
blamed the englishman when anything went wrong . we said he was sucking
our blood . now the government is ours, and now you will blame kenyatta
. but you should know that kenyatta, by himself, cannot give you
anything . i urge you to work hard so that our uhuru will be meaningful
. from today on, our motto will be " uhuru na kazi (freedom and work) .
