the congo tea & harmony it was almost as wacky as the mad
hatter's outdoor tea party in wonderland . smack in the middle of a
mudfouled road at pumpi, 40 miles from secessionist moise tshombe's
last-ditch headquarters at kolwezi, united nations brigadier reginald
noronha set up four folding tables and laid out tea, peanutbutter
sandwiches, coffee and simba beer . at 9 a.m., right on schedule, four
katanga province officials and three representatives of the union
miniere mining outfit roared up in two autos . " we have come to meet
you as friends, " declared one, and the party was on . despite the
apparent absurdity of it, the pumpi tea party was a dead serious affair
arranged so that tshombe could peacefully escort united nations troops
into kolwezi, the last major objective in its drive to end katanga's
2f-year secession . typically, tshombe failed to show up at the party,
but the operation went smoothly anyway . when the sandwiches were
munched and the tea sipped, noronha led a three-mile column of 1,000
indian troops straight into kolwezi . where were those proud katangese
defenders ? hundreds of gendarmes had fled into the bush before the
blue-helmeted u.n . troops arrived . some 75 white mercenaries,
including a pistol-packing blonde ambulance driver known around town as
madame yvette, had taken off for the angolan border . but most of
tshombe's 2,000 bedraggled men paid heed to his plea to " cooperate
with the u.n . and our congolese brothers, " dutifully stacked their
arms at a nearby depot . at his yellow villa on the edge of kolwezi,
tshombe greeted noronha with a grin . " nobody shot at you, i see, " he
cracked . replied noronha, throwing an arm around tshombe's shoulders,
/ i have come to thank you for keeping your word . " noronha was not
the only one who was relieved that tshombe was sticking to his promise
to reintegrate katanga with the rest of the congo . at u.n .
headquarters in manhattan,secretary-general u thant could now turn to a
problem that might turn out to be even tougher than ending tshombe's
secession . it was to establish the congolese central government's
authority over all the congo and end the anarchy that still reigns in
much of the nation . as a starter, thant appealed for $19 million to
finance 1963 civilian operations in the congo, estimated that at least
1,300 technical experts would be needed at once in the biggest aid
program the u.n . has yet undertaken . the plan is to cut the u.n.'s
19,000-man army in the congo by 50 per cent as soon as possible perhaps
by late summer .
