ghana outrage at law dictator kwame nkrumah outdid himself
last week . he not only flatly refused to free three politicel
prisoners who had been acquitted by ghana's highest court, but he
summarily fired the judge who had presided over their trial . the
defendants, five in all, were charged aith treason after nkrumah was
wounded in the shoulder by a bomb in an attempt on his life in august
1962 . the dictator's tame press had repeatedly condemned them in
advance . but chief justice sir arku korsah, who headed the three-man
court, chose to ignore the hint . at the end of a 51-day trial, he
convicted two of the accused, who will be hanged, but exonerated the
three top officials who were charged with masterminding the conspiracy
. among the three : former information minister tawia adamafio, 51, a
leftwing, london-educated lawyer who had once been nkrumah's closest
crony . the prosecution cited as " evidence " the fact that adamafio
had refused to sit beside the president on the day that he was to be
killed and claimed that later, when nkrumah lay on a hospital operating
table, he had tried to engage him in " wearisome argument " in order,
literally, to talk him to death . along with the other defendants a
former foreign minister and a leader of nkrumah's ruling convention
people's party adamafio was formally " discharged " by the court . but
the trio was immediately bundled back into the cells . interior
minister kwaku boateng cynically explained that the three prisoners'
acquittal " was the sole responsibility of the judiciary, not of the
government, which is therefore not bound to take any cognizance of it .
/ adamafio and his co-defendants will remain in jail under a law that
permits the government to detain any citizen for ten years without
trial " in order to prevent him from acting in a manner prejudicial to
ghana's security . " leaping to nkrumah's defense, the ghanaian times
recalled franklin roosevelt's 1937 attack on the u.s . supreme court,
adding : " we cannot have a wig-and-gown canteta while rome is burning
. the nation cannot be bamboozled by the diabolic insinuations and
aspersions of a confused and antagonistic judiciary . " nkrumah
completed the outrage when, in violation of ghana's constitution, he
sacked sir arku korsah, 69, a widely respected jurist who in 1956
became ghana's first black chief justice . the news astonished even
ghana's close friends abroad . noting that even south africa ? s
high-handed prime minister hendrik verwoerd has never interfered with
the judiciary, a shocked british official said : " this is the
stalinist technique . /
