communists the yellow man's burden hong kong's two communist
dailies last week breathlessly recounted the exploits of one cheng ho,
a eunuch employed by the third ming emperor, whose fleet of junks
explored the east african coast 80 years before the portuguese got
there in 1498 . both frontpage stories, purporting to prove that china
and africa had a long history of " friendly intercourse, " celebrated
the departure for post-colonial africa of communist china's premier
chou enlai, who is the grandest panjandrum from peking ever to visit
that continent . the tour, lasting six weeks or more, will take chou
and two planeloads of advisers to at least nine " nonaligned " african
countries, with a side trip to albania, red china's eastern european
satellite, and on the way home, a stopover in pakistan . competing with
moscow for friends among underdeveloped nations, chou evidently wants
to establish the yellow man's burden, even if china cannot exactly
afford to pick it up . among afro-asian countries, peking's prestige
has slumped badly as a result of its refusal to sign the nuclear test
ban . in africa alone, 17 of 33 nations voted last october to deny red
china a seat in the u.n., while only ten had diplomatic relations with
peking . during the flight to cairo aboard a chartered klm dc-7, chou
stripped down to long underwear for a sevenhour sleep, wolfed hearty
portions of russian caviar before landing . though egyptian authorities
provided an enthusiastic crowd to greet the chinese premier, the
official welcome was somewhat restrained . president nasser in tunisia
to attend ceremonies marking france's withdrawal from the bizerte naval
base when chou arrived got back to cairo in time to give a lavish
banquet at abdin palace . he presented red china's premier with egypt's
highest decoration the collar of the nile . in return, chou rose to
pledge an association between their two countries as enduring as " the
everflowing nile and yellow rivers . " but nasser scheduled as few
meetings as possible, instead loaded the visitor's schedule with trips
to nasser's pet projects, notably the aswan dam, where 2,000 russian
technicians could hardly escape chou's notice . what with some $1.5
billion in soviet aid and heavy dependence on u.s . wheat to feed
egypt, nasser has had strained relations with peking of late . days
before chou's arrival, his press belatedly chided china for its attack
on india . the welcome might be more satisfactory in countries that
have or need chinese technicians, loans and trade agreements algeria,
guinea, ghana, mali . elsewhere, chou's reception promises to range
from the cool to the curious, roughly the way it was back in cheng ho's
day .
