greece goodbye again " everybody wanted to cut my wings, /
protested ex-premier constantine karamanlis . " i refused to stay and
let them use their scissors . " with this bitter farewell hurled at
king paul, and at greek voters who had ended his eight-year
administration, karamanlis abruptly exiled himself to paris . no
watchdog . though conservative karamanlis was the ablest premier in
recent greek history, king paul and queen frederika considered him
highhanded (he thought the same of the queen) ; they also opposed his
ideas of reforming the constitution to give the premier stronger
executive powers . in june, when they rejected karamanlis' advice to
call off a scheduled state visit to britain because of possible leftist
demonstrations, he resigned and spent three months in a swiss villa .
returning to run for re-election, he was narrowly defeated by wily,
middle-of-the road george papandreou, 75 . karamanlis wanted to quit
then, but was dissuaded by his political allies and the king, who
convinced him that as leader of his majesty's loyal opposition he would
be democracy's watchdog . but karamanlis wanted to be top dog, and he
growled at each new move that boosted papandreou's popularity . the new
premier froze rents, lavishly promised all greeks a free education,
declared a moratorium on farmers' debts, offered wage boosts to just
about everybody . he gave up the premier's limousine ( " we can build
four village schools with the money " ), opened his office once a week
to petitioners who swamped him with gripes, job requests, even demands
to speed up their divorces . though anti-communist papandreou also
managed to please leftists . he promised to free most of the 1,000
political prisoners, in jail since the end of the communist civil war
in 1949 . he also complained, accurately, that the greek defense
budget, amounting to 5 per cent of its gross national income, is higher
than that of other small nations, in nato, called for more foreign aid
actually, the u.s . is planning cutbacks) . triumphal return ? though
some economists hopefully predicted that papandreou's spending spree
will be covered by rising national income, greek businessmen were
uneasy . when king paul, siding with the new premier, agreed to
postpone a parliamentary vote of confidence, karamanlis fumed ; he
charged that in delaying the early test of strength, the king was
submitting to " blackmail " by papandreou, who implicity threatened
that his defeat might cause political disorder and help the left .
finally, karamanlis summoned his closest political aide and told him :
/ i'm retiring and leaving greece tomorrow . " he booked space under a
false name on a flight to paris . only after karamanlis and his wife
had departed did his national radical union get the word . stunned,
they elected a new party chairman and took whatever comfort they could
from a letter their leader had left behind : " when a statesman knows
what is best for his country but cannot carry it out, he must, instead
of compromising with his conscience, retire . " karamanlis apparently
hopes that if papandreou makes a mess of things he can return from
exile in triumph . in the event of new elections, his supporters are
ready to campaign under the slogan " bring karamanlis back . " as for
papandreou, he claims to be looking forward to a new vote, confident of
an easy victory .
