australia asians, keep out ! , underpopulated australia spend
$30 million in 1963 to attract new citizens, since war's end has
increased its population from 7.5 million to a mere 11 million . that
adds up to fewer inhabitants than pennsylvania has, in an area 66 times
larger . nonetheless, australia clings to some of the world's most
restrictive immigration laws, has traditionally discriminated against
asian and other nonwhite immigrants in order to preserve what
immigration minister alexander downer has described as " an anglican
european community embodying all that is best of the old world and the
new . " australia's " immigration apartheid " dates from the latter
half of the 19th century, when 50,000 chinese flocked there to work
farms and gold mines . white colonists, fearful that the newcomers
would depress wage levels, clamored for restrictive laws . today fewer
than 80,000 asians live permanently in the country, and experience
little racial discrimination, but only a few " distinguished and highly
qualified asians " are ever granted residence permits . whim creek .
the white australia policy is often carried to absurd, esoteric
extremes . recently, five japanese technicians employed by a
japanese-controlled mining concern at, of all places, whim creek in
western australia were convicted of violating an obscure 1904 law
specifying that " no asiatic or african alien shall be employed in any
capacity whatever in or about any mine claim . " as a result, western
australia's state legislature last week repealed the law, but virtually
negated its action by adopting an amendment specifying that asians must
still get government permits to work in the mines . there is even less
hope for liberalization of national immigration policies, whose
principal victims are the parents and children of mixed marriages . one
typical case this month involved an indian couple who came to australia
in 1962 to live with their two sons, both of whom are married to
australian girls, only to be ordered out of the country . said the
father : " i've found hell in australia . " skeptical neighbors .
critics of the white australia policy, including leading churchmen and
educators, object that only through selective asian immigration can the
government hope to attract all the skilled citizens it needs .
moreover, they argue, australia can never realize its potential as a
leader of southeast asia so long as its neighbors are convinced that
australians are white supremacists . prime minister sir robert menzies
in fact ordered more liberal interpretation of immigration policy, but
he insisted during the recent election campaign that he would never
permit any basic reform in the law . to do so, said he, " would create
in australia the kind of dreadful problems they now have in other
countries . /
