the hole in the wall the sweetest christmas
music berliners have heard in more than two years had nothing to do
with bach or handel . it was the ugly stutter of jackhammers tearing
gates in the berlin wall, the whine of cranes removing zigzag barriers
from heavily guarded crossing points . then, late last week, the
candystripe customs poles went up, and thousands of grinning,
gift-laden west berliners swarmed through the wall for their first
reunions with eastern sector relatives since august 1961 . a long row
of glowing charcoal braziers warmed the approach to the oberbaum
bridge, and two brightly lit christmas trees guarded its western end .
on the other side of the river spree, even the trigger-happy east
german vopos wore grins above their cradled submachine guns . only till
midnight . ironically, communism's grudging christmas present to west
berlin seems to have originated in the toy factory of nikita
khrushchev, who resembles santa claus only in shape . chilled by the
reception east germans gave him last summer at the wall, and aware that
the spirit of detente had not yet thawed the frozen pivotal point in
east-west relations, khrushchev talked east german boss walter ulbricht
into opening negotiations for the christmas visits . ulbricht was
apparently in no mood to be generous . the hole in the wall is a tiny
one by any measurement . only those west berliners who have immediate
relatives in the communist part of the city may pass through the five
special entry points designated by the east germans . passes, issued by
east german postal officials, are good through jan . 5, but only from 7
a.m . to midnight, except on new year's day when the pass holders may
stagger back as late as 5 a.m . though some 800,000 west berliners
qualify for the passes, many of them are fluchtlinge refugees from east
germany who would be nabbed by the vopos the moment they crossed the
wall and therefore will not dare to try it . tears & brandy . but
despite restrictions and red tape, some half a million west berliners
will probably make the sentimental journey before the holiday season
ends many of them more than once . tears and brandy flowed as the first
visitors crossed the wall . grandparents sized up snow-suited
two-year-olds they had never seen except in photographs . " does the
baby meet the family standards ? " asked one proud west german mother
. " ja, schon, " wept the grandmother . although the west berliners
arrived laden with everything from lebkuchen to long underwear, not all
the gifts came from their side of the wall . one east german lad blew a
year's savings on two geese, a sweater and a bottle of brandy to
welcome his long-immured relatives . some western diplomats felt the
communist christmas present was wrapped in blackmail, nervously awaited
ulbricht's next move . but though the hole in the wall will be sealed
up after the holiday season, it will never seem so impenetrable again .
after this brief, tantalizing breach, the wall's ugly masonry will look
all the more intolerable to east and west berliner alike .
