russia    "we too are people"   not since the trotskyite riots in the
1920's had moscow seen anything like it.  while crowds of russians
watched with amazement, more than 400 african students last
week battled red cops in the streets, inside red square itself,
right past nikita khrushchev's own office window .
"moscow -- a second alabama," said one crudely lettered sign,
in russian and english . "stop killing africans," warned
another placard . mourning bands . the race riot was
touched off by the mysterious death of edmond asare-addo, 29,
a second-year medical student from ghana who was
studying at kalinin institute, about 100 miles northwest of the
capital . on the eve of his marriage to a russian girl, the student's
body was discovered near the railroad tracks of a suburban moscow
station . the soviet police claimed that asare-addo, drunk, had
fallen down in the 11 degree-below-zero weather and frozen to
death . but ghanaians, who knew that the marriage was fiercely opposed
by the girl's russian friends, insisted that the youth was stabbed
below the chin and tossed into the snow . quickly swinging into action,
students at patrice lumumba friendship university spread the word to
other africans in leningrad, kalinin, and as far away as odessa and
tashkent . the message:  we march on the kremlin . wearing the
traditional red mourning band of ghana around their heads, the students
gathered before the ghana embassy on a street a mile from red square .
"no trouble," shouted their leaders as the procession trooped off, but
at the end of the street, there was plenty . soviet police had
barred the way with trucks and cars . when the cops refused to budge,
the crowd began rocking a police car, intending to flip it over .
anxious to avoid bloodshed, and out-numbered 100 to 1, the police gave
way after a brief scuffle . as english-speaking russian
youths -- members of the young communist league -- blocked the view
from western photographers, the students regrouped, marched
through the heart of moscow singing freedom songs . but the police
regrouped too, and near red square, officials commandeered more
trucks to block the entrance . loudspeakers blared "entry to red square
is closed," but the africans squeezed through a space between two
trucks; as two students dropped a policeman with a flying tackle,
other marchers grappled with cops on top of the vehicles .
"it's natural ." once again police gave way . the horde raced across
red square, up an incline not far from nikita's window (he was out
inspecting an economics exhibition), past lenin's granite mausoleum, and
on toward the historic spassky gate that leads to the inner kremlin
grounds . at that moment the huge iron gates clanged shut . using
sound trucks, the police pleaded with the students to disperse, but for
two more hours they argued and jostled with police . ogling the
demonstration were thousands of russians, who watched from the street
and from the windows of gum, the big state-owned department store,
until employees curtained off the uncomradely scene .
finally about 100 students were allowed to interview soviet minister of
higher education vyacheslav eliutin, who promised an investigation of
the student's death . it was a stormy, two-hour session, with africans
demanding an end to all forms of official discrimination . "african
students get beaten up every day," one protested . "and soviet
policemen do nothing ."
neither did ghana's ambassador to moscow j.b. elliot . next day, as
students again massed near the embassy, he closed the building (for
"repairs" to damaged furniture), raised no objection as police herded
the angry ghanaians away . elliot tried to laugh off the melee,
dismissed talk of widespread bias against students as nothing but
"rumors ." relations with soviet students are cordial, he insisted .
"but it's natural to take a punch at each other ."
futile protest . even kremlin propagandists did not make that
nonsensical claim . instead, the russians clamped a tight censorship
on the embarrassing affair, for two days did not print or broadcast one
word about the riot all moscow was talking about . finally,
izvestia issued a stern warning to the students, told them to "respect
soviet laws" or get out of the country . prague has erupted in two
race riots within two years . last february in sofia, bulgarian
militiamen wielded clubs against 200 ghanaians who were marching down
the main street demanding nothing more than their own campus
organization . in moscow, africans have been smoldering for years
over thinly disguised racial discrimination . except for a token number
of russian students, the dining rooms and dormitories of lumumba u .
(which africans sardonically call "apartheid u .") are segregated .
africans find it difficult to date a russian girl . students squirm
at the stares they get in public and object to poor service they often
receive in restaurants . despite professions of brotherhood, many
russians still think africans are half-civilized strangers who have
just emerged from the jungle . " we too are people, not animals," cried
one sign carried by students who surged through moscow's streets last
week . to which one russian replied, obviously groaning under the weight
of the imperialist white man's burden:  "we help them and give them
an education . then they turn against us ."
