communists       the sphinx anyone?  the most reluctant
rubberneck in egypt last week was communist china's premier chou
en-lai . granted only three sessions with president nasser during
his week's sojourn in cairo, chou was propelled relentlessly
through the list of vip tourist attractions:  an automobile plant,
a museum, egypt's military academy, the aswan dam . when his
hosts insisted on a close-up inspection of the sphinx, chou asked
plaintively:  "do i have to go?  i've already seen it from a
distance ." though the visit to egypt was only the first leg of his
scheduled two-month swing through africa, the round of sightseeing
clearly tired the ailing, 67-year-old chou . for the first time,
westerners noticed that he has only partial use of his right arm,
which was usually clutched tightly over his stomach . at one point,
after climbing a flight of stairs at an aswan power station, the
ashen-faced premier staggered off into a corner as if he were about
to faint . one of two doctors in his entourage hurried over and
appeared to give him a whiff of smelling salts . as chou raised his
head, blood trickled from his nose . "it happens whenever he gets
tired," shrugged one of his aides . "it is not serious, but that
is why he always has a doctor with him ." chou nonetheless had
plenty of energy for speechmaking, harped repeatedly on the peking
version of moscow's we-will-bury-you refrain . indeed, to
hear chou, the afro-asians will bury not only the west, but russia as
well . "the asian and african peoples," he proclaimed, "through
their labor and intellect created illustrious civilizations which were
demolished by imperialist aggression and tyranny . now that we have
broken the imperialistic shackles, we will be able to work new
miracles ." for all his eagerness to win african support for peking's
side in the sino-soviet conflict, however, chou could offer little
cash to the underdeveloped countries . in some areas that the
chinese have cultivated, they may even end by making more
enemies than friends . by lending somalia $20 million to buy arms for
its campaign to grab adjacent territory, peking has angered neighboring
kenya, where it has also spent heavily to woo the new nation . it may
succeed at least in raising russia's ante in africa and asia . at
week's end, as chou left for algeria, nikita khrushchev was
reportedly planning his own swing through africa . before
visiting cairo next spring, he may also junket to india and
nepal on chou's back doorstep . then it will be nikita's turn
to tell who will bury whom .
