cold war     improved balance      any surprises at nato's year-end
ministerial conference in paris were purely accidental . an
elevator got stuck in the headquarters of the alliance, briefly
trapping a dozen photographers . then u.s . defense secretary robert s .
mcnamara narrowly missed sudden death when the four-engine jet
carrying him from orly airport to saigon braked to a jolting stop on
the runway, just in time to avoid collision with an incoming plane .
as for the meeting of nato's defense, finance and foreign
ministers, it went so smoothly that the session adjourned after
only two days, a day ahead of schedule . gentle reminder .
mcnamara, impressive as usual, ticked off a few awesome facts of
u.s . nuclear power:  more than 2,000 atomic warheads ready in case
of war, a 100 per cent increase in two years; 500 sac bombers and
500 intercontinental missiles, with 1,000 more missiles by 1966;
a new 155-mm . nuclear howitzer to boost the power of army ground
forces, whose manpower has been raised by 45 per cent within two
years . in a gentle but unmistakable reminder to u.s . allies, the
pentagon chief said that unless they hiked their own contributions
to nato, congress and u.s . public opinion would become increasingly
restless over washington's far heavier share of the western defense
burden . in a sense, the familiar discussion of military
preparedness was overshadowed by nato's "general recognition," as
secretary-general dirk stikker summed it up, "of change in the
atmosphere of world affairs ." british foreign secretary r. a . butler
echoed a common view that in the wake ofthe kremlin's retreat in
the cuban missile crisis, the soviets "have renounced the policy
of high risks in dealing with the west ." u.s . secretary of state
dean rusk, while warning that the communists could create new dangers
with unpredictable and perilous speed, hinted that the array of
problems facing russia may make it far easier for the west to reach
agreements with the reds . the problems include the deeply
significant rift with red china, the slackening of revolutionary ardor
at home, and the soviet union's growing domestic economic troubles .
jane's verdict . nikita khrushchev has stretched his nation's
resources dangerously thin, the 1964 and 1965 budgets published in
moscow last week showed sharp cutbacks in plans for such key
sectors of heavy industry as steel and electric power in order to
divert massive additional funds to the lagging agriculture program
and the backward chemical industry . perhaps the lack of capital
was also the cause of the declining rate in russia's air and space
spectaculars . the latest edition of jane's all the world's aircraft
lists only one new soviet plane for 1962 -- a high altitude
reconnaissance plane like the u-2 . jane's also suggested that
russia's his and her space-twin flights "failed to achieve all their
objectives, which may have included orbital rendezvous," pointed out
that the russians, in addition, lost contact with their rocket probe of
mars . u.s  . projects, although begun with more modest objectives,
far exceeded expectations, the report stated, citing major gordon
cooper's 22-orbit flight and the mariner ii probe that relayed a
wealth of data about venus . "with the great saturn booster due to
become operational in 1964-65," jane's added, "the suggestion
that america and the soviet union should work together on major
projects like lunar exploration is both timely and sensible now that the
prospective partners are attaining a measure of equality .
