iran the munificent king once again the streets of teheran rang
with angry shouts . two thousand workers invaded the university campus
to battle students . in the teeming bazaar, steelhelmeted police beat
back religious leaders who were attempting a three-day strike . all the
excitement was over the social reforms of iran's 43-year-old king of
kings, shah mohammed reza pahlevi . after years of hesitation, the shah
at last was tearing the land from iran's feudal village owners and
religious leaders, distributing it to the peasants, and forcing factory
owners to give workers a 20 per cent share of their profits . the
moslem mullahs (priests), whose shrine lands were up for leasing to
iran's landless farmers, did not like the idea at all . students
protested the shah's dissolution of the majlis (parliament) a year and
a half ago after the legislators rigged elections, then crippled the
royal land reform bill with 93 amendments . since then, ruling by
decree, the shah has distributed 2,000,000 acres of private land (with
compensation to owners) to some 50,000 peasant families in 3,500
villages . it was some record for a monarch who once seemed ineffectual
and powerless to stave off the growing discontent of iran's poor masses.
a decade before, few would have imagined that workers and farmers
would be crying his slogans, waving his banners . but there they were
on the eve of the big referendum called to give the nation's yes or no
to his sweeping plans for aid to needy rural and city iranians . women,
who got the vote for the first time in iran's history, gathered at
polling places to shout, " long live mohammed reza shah for granting us
freedom . " the nation's poor were equally enthusiastic, flocked to
cast their ballots in unprecedented numbers . the shah expected a
landslide victory, and sure enough, early returns backed his referendum
by the lopsided margin of 1,000 to one . the popular enthusiasm was
doubtless aided by the shah's announcement on the eve of elections that
he was giving up the last of his own royal land, 3,500,000 acres on the
caspian's caviar coast .
