south korea fatigues to flannels seoul was decked in all
its festive finery last week as south korea observed the end of two
years, seven months and one day of military dictatorship . buses were
garlanded with wreaths and newly made flags decorated storefronts and
streetcars . the midnight curfew was lifted for the day, and 5,000
prison inmates were released on amnesty . in a bone-chilling drizzle
before the national capitol building, 15,000 shivering spectators
watched former military strongman general park chung hee, 46, take the
oath of office as south korea's fifth civilian president . promising
never " to permit the resurgence of dictatorship under any disguise or
pretext, " park said :. " the bright morning of the new republic has
dawned . let us put depression, melancholy, confusion and pessimism
behind us and create a new history of optimism and determination . "
despite park's ringing words, the only real change in south korea's
government is from military fatigues to civilian flannels . under the
new constitution, the president has almost dictatorial powers, and
though park's democratic-republican party garnered only 34 per cent of
the vote in the national assembly elections, the opposition was so
split that the d.r.p . has a whopping, 45-seat parliamentary plurality
. though park pleaded for national unity, opposition leader yun po sun,
who barely lost the presidential election, boycotted the assembly's
opening session, and other dissident assemblymen threatened to
investigate the corruption prevalent under park's military junta . far
more menacing to park is south korea's chaotic economy . in the past
year, retail prices have climbed 40 percent, and some 10 per cent
of the labor force is unemployed . foreign exchange reserves have
plummeted to $105 million . desperate for a new dollop of u.s .
economic aid, park invited a u.s . congressional delegation to his
innauguration . but the u.s . has slashed next year's total aid
commitment by $54 million to $236 million, hopes to pressure park into
stabilizing the economy . a continuing dictatorship in south korea is
not very palatable to the u.s . but with his dictatorial powers, park
can at least promise a degree of political stability .
