algeria the high cost of independence not long ago, the
west was ready to write off algeria's brash, sloganeering premier ahmed
ben bella as a mediterranean castro ripe for red domination . but times
do change . after seven months of independence, ben bella now relies on
a tide of aid from the west, not the east, to keep his struggling
country afloat . only last week, finance minister ahmed francis
returned from paris with pledges of $280 million in french aid for 1963.
at the same time, the u.s . tentatively agreed to launch a food
relief program for hardhit algerian peasants ; ben bella hopes this
can be broadened into a sweeping program of economic aid before long .
emptied by war . ravaged by 7f years of war with france, the bloody
s.a.o . terror and a fratricidal power struggle that soured the first
months of independence, algeria needs every centime it can get . only
one algerian in ten has a steady job . the illiteracy rate is 90 per
cent . officials figure that the country needs at least $2 billion to
rebuild, but the treasury is bare . said ben bella : " we are a
country emptied by war . " to fill it up again, ben bella needs western
help . at first, embittered by his 5f years in french prisons, he
blinkered himself to that fact . he threatened to turn all remaining
french-owned lands into state-run farms . he sauntered off to havana to
embrace fidel castro right after a meeting with president kennedy . he
accepted what little red aid he got with great fanfare, but
deliberately played down far more extensive help from the west
including a flood of food shipments from private u.s . charities that
have kept nearly half of his 10 million people from starving . but
beneath the bluster ben bella is more pragmatist than dogmatist, and
algeria's sorry state persuaded him to begin tacking with the western
wind . " he is determined to feed, clothe and employ his people, " said
one western diplomat, " and he's going to kick over any " isms' that
get in his way . " over the protests of militant marxists, he began
promoting " healthy cooperation " with france, sought increased aid . "
they are duty bound to help us reconstruct, " he said in an interview
with time correspondent james wilde . " this would help dissipate all
that went before . " france is committed to give algeria a minimum of
$200 million a year for the next three years and is sponsoring its
association with the common market . nearly 90 per cent of the
1,200,000 europeans who once tended algeria's vineyards and ran its
businesses have fled (along with some 200,000 job-seeking moslems), but
officials now are anxious to lure back teachers, technicians and
administrators to help straighten out the mess . year of austerity . to
strengthen his shaky position, ben bella is clearing the field of
opposition by persuasion where possible, force where necessary . he has
banned all parties except his national liberation front (f.l.n.) .
fortnight ago, he ousted extreme leftist leaders of the 300,000-member
general union of algerian workers because they were resisting his
rapprochement with france, replaced them with trusted pro-government
men . though the problems of regionalism and marauding guerrillas still
plague him, he has managed to win over most of the hostile tribal
chieftains in the hinterlands to his side . ben bella's biggest problem
by far is the economy . this year, he said, will be one " of austerity,
of convalescence . " to show that he means business, he pushed through
a skin-and-bones budget of $564 million, giving some ministries
one-tenth of what they had demanded . he also put a $400-a-month
ceiling on all government salaries his own included and slapped a 100
per per cent tax on income above $800 a month . to the ascetic ben
bella, who lives in a dingy, three-room bachelor flat with a nephew who
does all the cooking and cleaning, that seems perfectly reasonable .
for those who think otherwise, he has a stern answer . " this, " says
ben bella, " is the price of independence . "
