egypt surprise at suez when egypt's president gamal abdel nasser
grabbed the suez canal 6f years ago, his bitter enemies in europe
predicted that the big ditch would soon be filled with silt and that
untrained egyptian pilots would never be able to steer shipping through
safely . the critics turned out to be wrong on both counts . egypt has
widened the canal with bypasses permitting three convoys daily to use
the waterway more efficiently, and deepened it sufficiently to
accommodate most of the world's tanker fleet . last year 18,518 ships
traveled through the canal, 370 more than in 1961 . further plans call
for additional deepening of the canal, and making it two-way for its
entire 102-mile length . former stockholders of the old suez canal co .
were firmly convinced in 1956 that they would never get a cent out of
their nationalized investment . but with 1962 revenue at a whopping
$149.5 million (45 per cent above 1955), nasser's canal officials have
announced payment of the final $11.4 million installment on the $81.2
million compensation debt . responsible for the canal's success is its
egyptian boss, dynamic, balding mahmoud younis, 50, a onetime army
engineer and a close friend of nasser since the days when they shared
an office at the staff officers college, egypt's west point . though
younis had never sailed so much as a rowboat, nasser picked him to run
the busy waterway shortly after the british and french ship pilots
withdrew from the canal in september 1956 . at first, younis had
available only 26 trained pilots of the 250 normally required, but he
kept the canal functioning around the clock . " i didn't know anything
about ships, " he said . " but i did know a lot about movement control
from the army . keeping the ships shuttling back and forth was a simple
matter compared with organizing a battle . " younis takes great pride
in the performance of his egyptian pilots . " they thought that only
europeans could run the canal, but they were wrong, " he says . " i
have no inferiority complexes . to me, management is a science that
anyone can master . " u.s . shippers are full of admiration for the
efficient service they get in younis' canal . to them, he shrugs, " in
the u.s., you say the customer is always right . well, that's what i
say too . and you are my customers . "
