nature winter & mrs . wood from tokyo to tennessee, from
the baltic to the bosporus, a killer winter raged across many parts of
the world last week . blizzards and savage winds took 300 lives in
europe, and another 150 in the u.s . a slashing gale capsized a ferry
in the korea strait, causing 137 deaths, and an avalanche in the
mountains of north central japan entombed 19 persons . the thermometer
was playing tricks . while moscow's temperature was 11o, the mercury
plummeted to fantastic depths in a broad swath across the u.s . : -19o
in cleveland, -30o in parts of kentucky and tennessee . the u.s .
weather bureau blamed america's freeze on a " meandering strong wind
current " flowing south from canada, offered what comfort it could by
announcing, " as cold as it is, it is not as severe as the great cold
wave of 1899 . . e record cold so threatened the survival of southern
europe's migratory birds that the international hunting council asked
european governments to ban all hunting until the spring thaw ; in
italy and germany, fish hatcheries reported widespread losses as ice
cut off the oxygen supply of breeding fish . dynamited danube . in the
bitter cold, many nations suffered acute fuel shortages . in the u.s.,
the mayor of huntsville, ala . declared an emergency because of rapidly
vanishing natural gas supplies . the british government organized a
4,000-truck coal convoy to bring fuel into freezing communities, and
the nation's serious unemployment problem worsened as farms and
construction firms laid off tens of thousands of workers because of the
cold . in paris, the french cabinet ordered that priority on coal
deliveries be given to the aged . as yugoslavian factories began to
shut down for lack of heat, coal miners went back into the mines on
sunday . rome's city water authority told consumers to leave their taps
on at night to prevent them from freezing ; in london, 1,600 frozen
water mains burst . maternity nurses in a london hospital hit by a
power failure kept incubators warm by pouring boiling water into
containers around them . transportation came to a virtual standstill in
some hard-hit countries . record snowfalls canceled nearly 2,000 trains
in japan, and the orient express was snowbound in greece for 48 hours .
turkish border posts could only be supplied by army tanks, and nearly
300 snowbound communities in the italian apennines were cut off from
their supplies . three feet of snow covered bulgaria, and in greece
army units roamed the countryside with hay for starving livestock . ice
clogged both the mississippi and the canals of venice ; a blizzard
snapped a power cable in the bosporus, halting all shipping between the
mediterranean and the black sea . along the frozen danube, yugoslav
dynamite crews blasted lanes for boats and barges . spectacular outfit.
every sort of blizzard gear was worn, but the most spectacular outfit
was sported by diana wood, 35, pretty wife of britain's minister of
power richard wood . when an outbreak of power failures brought a storm
of complaints to the power ministry, mrs . wood helped raise at least
some temperatures by posing for the daily mail in her coldweather
costume : a turtleneck sweater, fish-net stockings, and skintight,
black woolen knee-length panties .
