europe a new & obscure destination
in an alliance in which partners had become increasingly
mindful of one another's sensitivities, in which victories were
tactfully not crowed over, and togetherness in itself was regarded as a
good thing, charles de gaulle last week reminded the world of what one
man with a will can do . over the past 20 years, on his own people and
on their neighbors, charles de gaulle has perfected his native talent
for handing out rude surprises . employing the lofty disdain that used
to infuriate roosevelt, churchill and stalin, de gaulle succeeded in
infuriating kennedy, macmillan and a host of others by vetoing
britain's admission to the common market . he might have been gentle
about it, allowing negotiations to sputter out in a confusion of
details . he chose to be blunt and his purpose was not just to shut
out britain or merely to humiliate her . he also shook the atlantic
alliance to its roots, set out to contest its leadership and to put in
question the future role of the u.s . in europe . for the west !
he created a dramatic historical turn, an obscure destination . dead
mechanism . western europe heard the news with anger and dismay . west
germany's economics minister ludwig erhard blamed de gaulle for a "
black day, " declaring that " the common market is now only a mechanism
and no longer a living thing . " alfred mullerarmack, west germany's
chief negotiator at brussels, quit his job in disgust . jean monnet,
the dynamic optimist who is the father of the common market, lamented
that " there now looms disunion with its inherent dangers . " britain's
prime minister harold macmillan told his country on tv : " what
happened at brussels was bad . bad for us, bad for europe, bad for the
whole world . " , " brutal " was the word heard most often in whitehall
and around the white house to describe de gaulle's behavior . architect
or at least co-designers of the atlantic alliance, u.s .
policymakers were plunged into gloom . " most unfortunate, " said the
state department . in congress there were revived mutterings about the
inefficacy of foreign aid and the ingratitude of allies . arkansas'
senator william fulbright talked of the " temporary aberration " of the
man . a nation that had hoped to be in a position to profit from the
communist split between russia and red china found a deep crevice
opening at its feet . and though the kennedy administration did not
speak of an " agonizing reappraisal " of its relations with a
recalcitrant france as john foster dulles once had u.s . military and
diplomatic policy toward europe was plainly in need of one . community
twilight . except for a glow of pride, tempered with nervous concern,
among some frenchmen, the only cheerful voices were being raised in
moscow, where soviet ideologists suddenly thought they saw confirmation
of the hoary marxist-leninist tenet that capitalist countries will
inevitably be destroyed by their " inner contradictions . " cried a
russian spokesman : " this is the twilight of the so-called european
community . a difficult navigation now awaits the american ship of
state . " not just the fact of what charles de gaulle had already done
tormented his allies : it was what he might yet do . and they searched
his prescient pronouncements from the past (see box) for clues . for 20
years the u.s . has been accustomed to lead the free world, and in that
time western europe rose from the ashes behind a shield of u.s men and
money . france itself has received $9.5 billion in outright aid and
$1.8 billion in loans since 1945 . there have of course been disputes
and differences of opinion, but until last week, no direct challenge of
u.s . leadership . what the u.s . now faced was a proposal that europe
rally round france to create a third force in the world capable of
dealing independently with both the u.s . and russia . this had been de
gaulle's proclaimed goal for years, but everyone had counted on his own
realistic appreciation of the increasing gains to france and europe of
the current course of atlantic partnership . it was a crowning irony
that de gaulle's effort to give europe a new voice, direction and
self-assurance is precisely what the u.s . has been trying to do ever
since world war ii . but the u.s . hardly expected things to work out
quite this way .
pictures in the louvre .
that they did is the
responsibility of one man charles andre marie joseph de gaulle, 72 .
his ability to bring a skillful influence to bear upon events should be
enough to send a believer in impersonal historical determinism back to
his books . tall and ungainly, so dim-eyed that he constantly stumbles,
so seldom a listener that he seems deaf, de gaulle should be a figure
of fun (and sometimes is), but the greatness in the man usually
survives the mockery . his mind is like the louvre, filled with battle
pictures in which the french are always winning ; his heart throbs
with simple emotions labeled patrie, dieu, gloire, and he has a gift
for prophecy that is more old testament than 20th century modern . de
gaulle's faults are common to many men he is bullheaded, arrogant,
touchy, more responsive to flattery than criticism, insufferably proud
of his intellect and insight . his virtues, however, are rare in any
age, and are summed up in the word character . what happened last week
in brussels was a head-on collision between charles de gaulle's design
for europe and the wider, world-embracing atlantic policy followed by
the last three american presidents and by most of the parliamentarians
of europe . lofted umbrella . the u.s . attitude, on which one
presidential speechwriter hung the ambitious phrase " grand design, "
is to accept and work for the concept of a strong, united europe linked
in partnership with north america, both acting together to raise the
living standards and secure the independence of the nations of africa,
asia and latin america . to make this design enduring, the u.s .
insisted that britain become a member of the common market, followed by
the scandinavian and other nato countries . the defense of this grand
design would be twofold : conventional arms and armies supplied by
europe, and the nuclear umbrella held aloft by the u.s . de gaulle's
european design is introverted, smaller, and dependent more on audacity
and cleverness than on sheer power . in effect, it represents another
of the historic efforts to create a unified europe under french
leadership an ambition that was pursued in the past by charlemagne,
louis xiv, napoleon bonaparte and napoleon iii . to de gaulle, europe's
rivers and mountains are not barriers, but the oceans are . since 1940
he has dreamed of persuading the " states along the rhine, the alps and
the pyrenees to form a political, economic and strategic bloc ; to
establish this organization as one of the three world powers, and,
should pickup strategic bloc ; to establish this organization as one
of the three world powers, and, should it become necessary, as the
arbiter between the soviet and the angloamerican camps . " gargantuan
stocks . conceivably, de gaulle at one point might have been weaned
away from his dream . when he returned to power in 1958 to lead a
france still riven by the algerian war, he demanded admission to a
three-power directorate of nato, but the idea was blackballed by
eisenhower and macmillan . he probably would have been as intransigent
as a co-director as he has been without becoming one . since then, he
progressively withdrew french ground and naval forces from nato
commands, banished u.s . nuclear warheads from french soil, and sank
billions of francs into a crash program to create a nuclear force de
frappe of his own . as of last week the force de frappe consisted of a
handful of atom bombs and a delivery system of exactly four mirage iv
jets, extremely fast (mach 2), highaltitude, two-seat light bombers .
the mirage iv's radius is only 1,000 miles . admittedly the force de
frappe is a modest operation and one that could swiftly be knocked out
of the air, even when, by 1965, the french hope to have 350 planes
capable of carrying atomic weapons . de gaulle concedes that his
nuclear weaponry will never match the gargantuan and lethal stockpiles
of russia and the u.s . but he thinks that it is big enough and
murderous enough to give any potential aggressor pause and besides, it
is his own . unfit islanders . in de gaulle's europe, france is first,
germany second, and the rest nowhere they can tag along respectfully as
camp followers, with little more weight or voice than tiny luxembourg .
britain is rejected as unfit economically or politically to join this
band of continental brothers because it 1) is an offshore island, and
2) has " special ties " with the u.s . and the commonwealth . to de
gaulle's jaundiced eye, the british attempt to enter the common market
was simply a trojan horse maneuver (an expression used with suspicious
frequency in parisian editorials and salons last week) staged by
washington to make sure that the u.s . domination of europe would not
be frustrated . britain did much to arrange her own fate . in 1950,
london was offered membership in the european coal and steel community
and refused . seven years later, london was invited to join in the
founding of the common market, and again refused . as the common market
got under way, britain tried to cripple it by setting up its own ragtag
rival bloc, the seven-nation european free trade association (with
austria, denmark, norway, portugal, sweden, switzerland) . but the
runaway economic success of the common market caused britain's
conservative government to reverse itself, and, in august 1961, britain
penitently applied for the membership it had once spurned . it asked
for full, not associate membership, with all that this implied in
declaring itself european . the application might have been received in
brussels, de gaulle insisted that britain bring it to paris instead .
/ matter of days . " during the slow first year of the brussels
negotiations, de gaulle was not actively in opposition . but he soon
made it clear he considered the british as suppliants, not equals :.
they could not hope to change the rules as a condition of joining the
club . the technical discussions ranged from such obscure items as the
tariff on kips and pigmeat to important ones concerning future trade
with australia and new zealand . by last month, of more than 2,500 big
and small questions, all but 26 had been amicably resolved . britain's
chief negotiator, edward heath, was so optimistic that on jan . 21 he
confidently told a u.s . official : " it is only a matter of days
before the question is settled in our favor .
this was brave but foolhardy disregard of the
imperious non uttered just a week before in de gaulle's celebrated
press conference, the theatrical shocker in which the " insular,
maritime " british were haughtily told to transform themselves into "
europeans " before joining the common market . de gaulle has long been
suspicious of britain's close ties with the u.s., and suspects that
secrets can be exchanged in the common english language . but de
gaulle's determination to veto britain's membership apparently came
just before christmas, when the news arrived of the kennedy-macmillan
meeting at nassau . at nassau, britain got formal word that the u.s .
would not supply it with skybolt, the airborne missile on which the
british had pinned all their hopes for delivering their nuclear
deterrent . skybolt shattered the british, and disquieted the french as
well, since it was regarded as proof that nuclear dependence on another
power was risky . if the u.s . could treat in that fashion an ally to
whom it was tied by blood, language and tradition, what could france
expect ? de gaulle was further angered by macmillan's agreement to
share polaris with the u.s . instead of moving to share nuclear
knowledge with france . that was when the phrase " trojan horse " first
began to be used in paris . overnight case . brussels, the scene of
britain's dashed hopes last week, is a dour, neon-lit old maid of a
city . on monday, the cobbled streets were slimy with black slush and
blanketed with chilling fog as britain's chief negotiator, edward
heath, arrived with his aides, minister for commonwealth affairs duncan
sandys and agriculture minister christopher soames . the french, with a
fine sense of economy, traveled light ; only luxembourg's four-man
delegation was smaller . french foreign minister maurice couve de
murville brought only an overnight case, for he knew that he would not
be staying long . couve arrived an hour late for the start of the
meeting at quatre bras, the modern foreign ministry building .
newsmen's questions to him died in the air at the grim set of the
frenchman's face . a path two feet wide miraculously parted the crowd
and, like an apparition or a leper couve moved unmolested to the
elevator . when the delegates emerged from the meeting at midnight,
west germany's economics minister ludwig erhard, a staunch supporter of
britain, grunted, " we made only linguistic progress . " a french
delegate lightly added, " if we reach an agreement, it will be based on
a misunderstanding . " on tuesday morning, u.s . ambassador john
tuthill hurried around to the delegations to deliver a lastminute
warning from president kennedy, pointing out the grave consequences of
a breakdown in the negotiations . the six reconvened at noon to hear
the west german proposal that was intended to save face for everyone by
postponing a decision for two months . a stormy discussion followed,
and couve de murville icily professed astonishment that a plan could
even be proposed in such bad parliamentary form .
monstrous thing .  in turn, the delegates of the other five warned
of the consequences of a rupture, but france's couve de murville was
adamant .  walter hallstein, chairman of the common market commission,
tried to change the wording of the proposal to make it more acceptable
to the french .  he failed .  there was nothing to do but summon heath
to hear the final verdict .  each head of delegation read a prepared
statement .  belgium's spaak called the rupture a "monstrous thing ."
dutch foreign minister joseph luns was equally bitter, while
germany's schroder pointedly told the french that the bundestag had
only ratified the treaty of rome in the first place on the assumption
that it would be widened to embrace new members .  then at last it
was couve de murville's turn .  couve, a brilliant, civilized,
highly trained diplomatist, who among his colleagues would usually
be seeking any new avenue of compromise, was now plainly little more
than a messenger boy for le grand charles .  "it is being said that we
broke off the negotiations," he declared .  "in reality, our
responsibility has been that of making clear that the negotiations have
been taking place in a vacuum since october, and of having said that it
is preferable to face the facts .  then he echoed the boss again .
when britain can accept all the requirements of the treaty of rome,
nothing can stop her from entering the common market .  but it is upon
her and not on us that the burden of proof lies .  it would have been
a little late in the day, but many at the table thought that it would
have been wonderful had heath given in entirely at this point and taken
couve up on his offer with no more haggling .  but the briton limited
himself to a dispassionate rebuttal .  "it has been contended," he said
,"that britain is not european enough .  there are many millions in
europe who know perfectly well how european britain has been in the
past and are grateful for it ."  added heath :"the truth is that
some people regarded the negotiations as being too close to success,
though they gave other reasons for breaking them off ."  when he
stopped speaking, all the delegates crowded around to shake his hand
all but france's men, who left unsmiling .  five stateless ones .  the
common market as it now exists offers a superb instrument for de
gaulle's strong hand to wield, even though he was contemptuous of it at
the start, and dismisses the eurocrats who work for it as les apatrides,
the stateless ones . after five years of operation its gross national
product stands at $210 billion, and industrial production has soared
40 per cent . the common market poured almost 80 million tons of steel
last year (compared with the u.s .'s 98 million tons), and is the
world's second largest automobile maker . as the world's biggest
trader, the common market is first in imports, second only to the
u.s . in exports . since 1958, imports from the rest of the world have
risen 39 per cent, those from the u.s . a giant 59 per cent, thus aiding
washington's desperate balance-of-payment problems . the question most
asked last week was whether the other five west germany, italy
and the benelux countries would permit le grand charles to make
the market his device for power . what de gaulle has demonstrated is
that he can blackball any nation he does not want in the common
market ("french shoulders are broad enough to bear the burden," said
a spokesman) . but de gaulle has yet to show that he can remake
europe in france's image . britain and the u.s . are betting that he
never will . indeed, the unanimous outcry from the other five common
market nations last week was ample testimony that they are currently
determined to resist france's grasp for leadership . last week the
five abruptly forced postponement of a special meeting of the common
market finance ministers called by the french to investigate the
extent of u.s . investment in europe, a pet hate of de gaulle's these
days . this rebuff disturbed french minister of finance valery giscard
d'estaing not at all . he reportedly remarked that the five had merely
deprived him of his dessert meaning, presumably, that france had
already enjoyed the british lion for breakfast . the five have also
shown signs of blocking other french projects, e.g ., algeria's
association with the six . sharp divisions . but as the initial and
genuine anger diminished, there was a question whether the smaller
countries, in their anxiety to bring britain in as a political
counterbalance to france and germany, would be willing to endanger the
common market itself . their economies are so dependent on the market
as a trading partner that it is inconceivable that any of them would be
able to separate out their own marbles to take them home .
it is west germany's support that charles de
gaulle needs to win the whiphand over europe . he had a stalwart
partner in 87-year-old chancellor konrad adenauer, the rhinelander
whose lifelong dream has been franco-german rapprochement . as it
happened, adenauer arrived in the elysee palace last month to sign the
treaty of friendship and cooperation with france at the very time when
de gaulle had sprung his large scheme on europe . by all accounts,
adenauer did not fully realize that the document he had signed was the
reinforcing seal of doom for britain's membership in europe and that he
was now put at odds with the u.s . scheme of things . at the ceremony
in paris, adenauer gently asked de gaulle not to force the germans into
the awkward position of choosing between the u.s . and france . tut,
tut, replied de gaulle reassuringly, "france has no intention of
putting germany into a position where such a choice would be necessary .
deserved whippings . whatever konrad adenauer desires, he is no
longer undisputed master at home . with economics minister (and
possible next chancellor) ludwig erhard threatening to resign if the
adenauer-de gaulle treaty is ratified before concessions are granted in
the common market, west germany's support for le grand charles is in
jeopardy indeed . already leaders of opposition factions in the
bundestag have warned that they would block ratification of the
franco-german treaty . it was a measure of de gaulle's rapid rise of
prestige that all the german papers posed the matter as a question of
choosing between the u.s . and france . most, understandably, chose the
u.s . the influential protestation in washington rests on its firm
loyalty to an american-led nato . the americans will sooner or later
withdraw from the continent if they get the impression that the federal
republic failed to oppose de gaulle's intention to undermine nato from
within .
sibylline delights . le figaro's gifted commentator
raymond aron, whose admiration for de gaulle is qualified, remarked
last week that he is convinced that the general takes "lonely pleasure
in the spectacle of the arguments he causes ." what disturbs many
americans is not de gaulle's effort to assert a reviving continent's
strength, but his future plans for europe . and what disturbs many
continentals is de gaulle's readiness to be far more disregarding of
their sensibilities than the u.s . has been . a de gaulle agreement to
consult, as adenauer and others have found out, means his willingness
to give the other partner an audience to hear de gaulle's intentions .
de gaulle accepts the commitments france entered into while he was not
in power, but distorts them to france's advantage . after vetoing
britain, de gaulle last week invited danish premier jens otto krag to
join the common market either as full member or as associate an
invitation that the other five members indignantly thought was the
responsibility of all six to extend . krag's own surprised reaction was
to say that denmark's hopes were "based on the assumption that britain
would join the common market ." similarly, the other partners were
suspicious of de gaulle's intense side cultivation of spain last week,
and his long private talks with soviet ambassador sergei vinogradov,
who in the years de gaulle was not in power kept up his close contacts
with him . last week france signed a bilateral trade agreement with
russia, calling for a 10 per cent increase in trade between the two
powers . will de gaulle take it upon himself to negotiate separately
with the soviet union ? his anti-communist bona fides has been amply
proved by his stands on berlin and cuba, when he firmly backed kennedy .
there is a story that, in 1941, when hitler invaded russia, de gaulle
told an aide, " now we must begin thinking of stopping the communist
push in europe . " the aide protested that the prospect seemed remote,
and de gaulle replied, " remember these hours . i often make mistakes
in what i do, but never in what i predict . " acts, not words . in
talking to his friends, de gaulle makes it plain that he thinks the
situation behind the iron curtain offers an opportunity for the west .
he argues that the sino-soviet split, the economic pull of western
europe, the gradual " bourgeoisation " of russia all contribute to
turning the communists, and especially the eastern european satellites,
westward . and out of this he conceives of some kind of european
arrangement, never fully defined, " stretching from the atlantic to the
urals . " holding this vision, de gaulle has never ruled out
negotiation with moscow he merely sets the condition that the russians
must first prove themselves in acts, not words . those who fear de
gaulle's intentions wonder whether he will at some future moment
consider a disengagement in europe in which the 400,000 u.s . troops
would go home in return for a russian pull-out of eastern europe . this
may be one reason why he wants his own nuclear force .
no one in the world, particularly no one
in america, can say whether, where, when, how and to what extent
american nuclear weapons will be used in defense of europe . " and, he
argues, " it is intolerable for a great state that her fate be left to
the decisions and action of another state, however friendly she may be
. " it is a powerful point, and is not fully met by offering u.s .
nuclear weapons to a european nato group, since the final decision to
launch any bombs would still presumably be in u.s . hands . purged
britain . time was when the u.s . called the tune on such crucial
questions . de gaulle's dramatic action raises the question whether the
u.s . can, or should, continue to do so indefinitely . in his final
words to his common market partners, france's couve de murville
somberly expressed de gaulle's thoughts on the matter . " i will say
once again that we are not seeking to maintain a large or small europe,
but to know if the europe we are creating is a european europe . " in
effect, he seemed to be saying : if britain one day truly purged
itself of its close american connection, it might prove itself eligible
at last, in charles de gaulle's eyes, for common market membership .
irritating as it might be, it was an idea with some force . so
sympathetic a transatlantic figure as britain's viscount hailsham,
speaking in manhattan fortnight ago, gently warned president kennedy
not to think that he is the " commander in chief of the forces of the
free world . " in fact, said lord hailsham, " this is precisely what he
is not if the allies to which he is bound are not to be deprived of the
very independence for which they are prepared to unite . " the
superiority in numbers, wealth and strength, and therefore in influence
and initiative, of the u.s., is not in question . nor is its integrity
. . . (but) have the americans paused to reflect that an alliance in
which all the advanced and sophisticated technologies were left to one
of the partners, and the rest were relegated to supply a complement of
conventional arms in war, and in commerce a modest contribution of
scotch whisky and compact cars . . . would not ultimately succeed in
retaining the loyalty of european electors ?
