as a writer, charles
de gaulle has the gift of clarity, as a politician he knows the uses of
ambiguity, and as a statesman he has shown remarkable consistency .
from nearly 30 years of writings and remarks come these affirmations of
his aspirations and ambitions : on nato alliances do not settle
everything . (1963) the glory of france our country, with her tinted
sky, her varied contours, her fertile soil, our fields full of fine
corn and vines and livestock, our industry, our gifts of initiative,
adaptation and self-respect, make us, above all others, a race created
for brilliant deeds . the sword is the axis of the world, and greatness
cannot be shared . (1934) . the emotional side of me tends to
imagine france, like the princess in the stories or the madonna in the
frescoes, as dedicated to an exalted and exceptional destiny . but the
positive side of my mind also assures me that france is not really
herself unless in the front rank ; that only vast enterprises are
capable of counterbalancing the divisive ferments which are inherent in
her people . in short, to my mind, france cannot be france without
greatness . (2955) . who in good faith can dispute the fact
that france must help to build western europe into an organized union
of states so that gradually there may be established the most powerful,
prosperous and influential political, economic and military complex in
the world ? (1962) from the atlantic to the urals the equilibrium of
europe, the guarantee of peace along the rhine, the independence of the
vistula, danube and balkan states, the creation of some form of
association with the peoples all over the world to whom we have opened
the doors of western civilization, an organization of nations which
will be something more than an arena for disputes between america and
russia these surely are our great interests in tomorrow's world .
(1944) . perhaps it might be possible to renew franco-russian
solidarity in some fashion, which, even if repeatedly betrayed and
repudiated,
remains no
less a part of the natural order of things both with regard to the
german danger and the anglo-saxon efforts to assert their hegemony .
(1944) . i am convinced that if france took the initiative to
summon europe to organize itself, in particular with german help, the
whole european atmosphere from the atlantic to the urals would be
changed . (1950) the americans in the mortal dangers we french have
survived since the beginning of the century, the u.s . has not given us
the impression that it regards its own destiny as linked with that of
france, that it wishes france to be great and strong, that it is doing
all it can to help her to remain or become so once again . (1945) .
the alliance has been built on the basis of integration, in
which the defense of each of the countries of continental europe, apart
from england, has no national character, in which in fact all is
commanded by the americans, and it is the americans who determine the
use of your atomic weapons . (1960) . the american interest is
not always the french interest . this will be more and more true in the
future, which will give europe a greater and greater weight, and which
will therefore contribute to diminishing the relative weight of the u.s
. (1963) . following britain, other states would want to enter
the common market . in the end there would appear a colossal atlantic
community under american dependence and leadership, which would soon
completely swallow up the european community . (1963) britain & europe
england and france will together create peace, as twice in 30 years
they have together confronted war . (1944) . england has
turned over to the americans what meager atomic forces she had . she
could have turned them over to europe . thus she has made her choice .
i am distressed to see england align herself with the u.s., for she
risks acting like their traveling salesman . the english will no doubt
enter the common market, perhaps in 50 years, and i will without doubt
no longer be here . (1963) third force i have sought to assure france
primacy in western europe by preventing the rise of a new reich that
might again threaten its safety ; to cooperate with east and west and,
if need be, contract the necessary alliances on one side or the other
without ever accepting any kind of dependency ; to persuade the states
along the rhine, the alps and the pyrenees to form a political,
economic and strategic bloc ; to establish this organization as one of
the three world powers and, if necessary, as the arbiter between the
soviet and anglo-american camps . since 1940, my every word and deed
has been dedicated to establishing these possibilities . (1955) .
only france knows that peace or war will be decided in europe
. yes, it is europe, it is all europe that will decide the destiny of
the world . if the peoples of europe, on whichever side of the curtain
they find themselves, want to establish concord among themselves, then
peace will be assured . but if europe remains divided in two opposed
factions, war will sooner or later destroy the human race . (1959) .
who can say what tomorrow will bring ? who can say that, in
the future, if the political background should change completely, the
two powers (the u.s . and russia) that have the nuclear monopoly will
not agree to divide the world ? who can say that if the occasion
arises, each of the two, while deciding not to launch its missiles at
the main enemy, so that it might itself be spared, will not crush the
others ? it is possible to imagine that, on some awful day, western
europe would be wiped out from moscow and central europe from
washington . and who can even say that the two rivals, after i know not
what political upheaval, will not unite ? (1959) on leadership glory
gives herself only to those who have always dreamed of her . (1934) .
it was by acting as the inflexible champion of the nation and
the state that it was possible for me to gather the consent, even the
enthusiasm, of the french, and to win from foreigners respect and
consideration . those who were offended by this intransigence were
unwilling to see that for me the slightest wavering would have brought
collapse . limited and alone though i was, i had to climb to the
heights and never then to come down . (1940, describing his wartime
leadership) . every man of action has a strong dose of
egotism, pride, hardness and cunning . but all those things will be
forgiven him if he can make of them the means to achieve great ends .
aloofness, character, and the personification of greatness, these
qualities it is that surround with prestige those who are prepared to
carry a burden which is too heavy for lesser mortals .
