cambodia the man who wouldn't be king once he dreamed of
going to hollywood as the " cambodian charlie chan . " then he took up
the saxophone and made like " cannonball " adderley, belting out such
compositions of his own as love without hope . he supported a troupe of
30 dancing girls and a string of 20 thoroughbreds and worked diligently
to improve the breed . sports are his latest craze . he captains a
championship volleyball team and recently dunked in 92 points in a
basketball game . eccentric and mercurial he may be, but cambodia's
prince norodom sihanouk, 41, is also one of the shrewdest leaders in
southeast asia . sihanouk was cambodia's young king until 1955, when he
stepped down from the throne to run for elective office in the
government, because the " true face of the people was hidden from me .
/ under his leadership, cambodia has embarked on an ambitious program
of development . last year the rice crop was the best in memory, and a
record exportable surplus of 400,000 tons was predicted . cambodia does
not have one riel of external debt, and its currency is 100 per cent
covered by gold and foreign exchange (v . 50 per cent in the u.s.) ;
25 per cent of the budget is spent on education, one of the highest
percentages in the world . " socialist majesties . " but cambodia, like
many pleasant and languid places, is now beset by pressing economic
problems . the planned $26 million deficit for this fiscal year has
unexpectedly doubled, and the government is so short of cash that the
current five year plan is literally out of money . some $24 million
worth of public projects have had to be canceled, and foreign exchange
reserves are dwindling at the rate of $1,500,000 a month . sihanouk's
reaction was characteristically unpredictable ; he purged his
government of its oldtimers and installed in their places a group of
his most fiery critics . they are youthful (average age : 36),
left-wing, paris-trained intellectuals whom sihanouk sneeringly calls "
their socialist majesties . " says sihanouk : " i know that they do
not like me . they hate me . they have always supported the communists
. now i've given them the opportunity of supporting cambodia for the
first time . i told them, " you can kill me, but you have no right to
kill cambodia . " ' what's good for g . m . . . . behind sihanouk's odd
choice of ministers is an adroit policy . with opponents in his very
cabinet, sihanouk is able to keep an eye on his foes, and to force them
to share blame for a worsening financial situation . he has allowed the
cabinet to slash government expenditures, but vetoed its proposal to
nationalize the french rubber plantations, which are a prime source of
foreign exchange . " the french might be capitalists, " sihanouk said,
/ but they are capable . " he also delights in pointing out to his
left-leaning intellectuals the failure of cambodia's red chinese-built
factories . " they only cost us money, " sihanouk says . " i tell my
cabinet that that's not what ford or general motors would do . " though
he deals roughly with cambodia's native communists, sihanouk artfully
refuses to join either the communist or western camps . hoping to keep
him neutral, the u.s . has weighed in with $300 million in economic aid
since 1955, to this nation of 5,700,000 people, and russia has built a
500-bed hospital and sent industrial equipment . currently, neutralist
sihanouk leans toward more western influence in his country, for he
feels that a counterbalance is needed against the rising strength of
the communists in southeast asia . but the main object of sihanouk's
policy is still to " maintain the joie de vivre of my people . i want
them to work also, but not so hard as communists . we cambodians are
not animals or machines . we have to remain gay and free . we must be
allowed to have the good things . /
