the congo round 3 ? the sound of
christmas in katanga province was the thunk of mortar shells and the
rattle of machine guns . after an uneasy twelve-month truce between u.n
. forces and the troops of katanga's secessionist moise tshombe, a few
minor incidents got out of hand, and for the third time since september
1961 the province was in turmoil . blue-helmeted u.n . soldiers swarmed
through elisabethville, seized roadblocks on the highways . swedish u.n
. saab jets swooped low over katanga's airfield at kolwezi, destroying
four planes on the ground and setting oil tanks ablaze . in the first
skirmishes, seven u.n . soldiers were dead . the fighting began with
what elisabethville residents call " l'affaire simba " a reference to
simba beer, the local brew that both sides guzzled on and off duty . as
the u.n . told it, boozed-up katangese gendarmes suddenly opened fire
on a detachment of ethiopian u.n . troops in suburban lubumbashi . as
tshombe described matters, a few tipsy ethiopians started the shooting
by scrambling atop a 200-ft . slag heap outside the big union miniere
plant and taking potshots at the katangese . fireworks next . in any
case, katangese soldiers at a golf course on the outskirts of
elisabethville took the occasion to shoot down an unarmed u.n .
helicopter moving overhead . they stoned the six surviving crewmen,
pummeled them with rifle butts ; a 23-year-old sikh lieutenant, who
lay helpless with a machine gun slug in the abdomen, died unattended in
three hours . indian brigadier reginald noronha, commander of u.n .
troops in katanga's capital, was furious this is the last time, he said
. " next time there are going to be fireworks . " noronha did not have
long to wait . three days later an ethiopian guard fired a warning shot
at a katangese soldier who was approaching his post . unhurt, the
katangese rolled down a hill in search of cover, but his comrades
thought he had been hit and opened fire . soon u.n . positions around
the city were under attack . tshombe " agreed " to a cease-fire, but
his 20,000 men kept right on fighting . " they are mad, " said a red
cross official who saw them rampaging through a township, firing at
anything that moved . " they are killing their own men . " the u.n .
claimed tshombe had lost control of his men which gave it an excuse to
strike back . from manhattan u.n . headquarters, orders were flashed to
the 12,000-man u.n . force in katanga : " take all necessary action in
self-defense and to restore order . " spearheaded by 5,700 tough,
bitter gurkhas, the u.n . force methodically swept disorganized
katangese troops from their guardposts on the road to northern rhodesia
. power lines fell in the fray, leaving shabby little elisabethville
(pop . 180,000) without light, water or phones .
spears & arrows . noronha demanded once more
that tshombe call a ceasefire, warned that unless he complied in 30
minutes, " a general war will begin . " tshombe rejected the ultimatum,
and the u.n . went over to an all-out air and ground offensive . the
indian brigade stormed and captured the headquarters of katanga's
gendarmerie at karavia, a mile from elisabethville, with little
resistance . another column of troops advanced northwest toward
jadotville, in the heart of the copper belt that gives tshombe $40
million a year in revenues . u.n . forces announced that they had taken
over elisabethville's post office, radio station and railway depot and
had occupied tshombe's palace . at the height of the shooting, tshombe
vanished into hiding, but he was not calling it quits . " everywhere,
the u.n . and its troops will be fought with traps, with poisoned
arrows and spears, " he said in an angry statement through one of his
aides . " we will resist by all means, including the total destruction
of all our economic potential . " was this the final showdown in the
u.n.'s 2f-year attempt to end katanga's secession from the congo ?
u.n . spokesmen insisted that it was not, but secretary-general u thant
says he is convinced that unless tshombe is subdued soon, premier
cyrille adoula's central government in leopoldville will collapse . the
u.s . agrees, and the state department recently has been talking up the
imminent danger of a leftist, soviet-backed takeover in leopoldville .
but the british, who see katanga as a stable buffer for the rhodesias,
warned against the " futility of trying to impose a political
settlement by force . " the french, who, like the british, have heavy
investments in the union miniere, want hands off, and in brussels, 200
belgians demonstrated their feelings by marching on the u.s . embassy
shouting, " down with kennedy !
