western europe round 1 to the general if most of europe
seemed angry at charles de gaulle last week, no one seemed to know
quite what to do about him . speaker after speaker at the european
parliament in strasbourg ringingly condemned charles de gaulle's
imperious thumbs down on british membership in the common market . as a
result, declared common market chairman walter hallstein, the six have
been plunged into their " first real crisis a crisis of confidence . "
in european capitals from bonn to rome, france's common market partners
spoke bravely of ganging up on de gaulle, perhaps by blocking his plans
for associating france's former african colonies with europe, or even
by boycotting french goods . empty chair ? but when the speeches were
over, european parliamentarians speechlessly realized that there was
almost no concrete action that they could take against le grand charles
. de gaulle seemed to hold all the trumps . some members of the other
common market five had talked of giving france the " empty-chair "
treatment, carrying on their efforts for european unity and atlantic
partnership without the french . yet what purpose would it serve to
exclude france from nato councils ? none at all . its contributions
to allied fighting strength are sufficiently meager it is two divisions
behind its commitments in germany, it withholds its mediterranean fleet
from nato, keeps most of its metropolitan territory out of the air
warning system, and even prohibits foreign nuclear weapons on french
soil . still, sheer geography gives france a veto on nato planning .
could france be ignored in the tariff discussions of the 40-odd members
of gatt, or in oecd, the european economic coordinating group that grew
out of the marshall plan ? hardly, since the economies of all western
european nations are intertwined with france's . the urgent french need
to export food surpluses, and its booming market for other nations'
industrial goods, are the stick and the carrot that have given the
community much of its momentum . even belgium's paul-henri spaak,
perhaps the most implacable foe of de gaulle's plans for europe, agreed
last week that there was no general support for retaliatory measures
against france . west germany's economics minister ludwig erhard, who
was in tears at brussels when france blackballed britain, went home
breathing defiance of de gaulle and threats to topple konrad adenauer
nowhere (see below) . and after all the oratory at strasbourg, a "
solemn protest " motion condemning de gaulle's " domination " of europe
was ignominiously defeated by a tie vote of 38-38 hardly a resounding
gesture of defiance . personality change . by their very lack of
passion at the new realities, european statesmen proved that there is
still a lot of life in deep-rooted nationalism, whether de gaulle's or
anyone else's . the communists had found out the same thing in
yugoslavia, poland, hungary and east germany . there were differences
: russia had tried to impose a unity, and western europeans had hoped
to evolve into a unity by democratic means and for mutual benefit .
western europeans still insist that the idea of europe will carry the
day, but at the moment there is a new consciousness of one another's
disparate tastes, talents and destinies . the french, aware of the
hostility of allies, were reassuring everybody that they were not
proposing to go it alone . foreign minister couve de murville said : "
it is not a question of freeing the european personality but of
remaining inside the atlantic alliance . " even so, europe's
personality had undoubtedly undergone a change . said one minister in
brussels last week : " for the present, only expect the things to be
done quickly around here that are plainly good for all the six
countries . it will be quit a while before we hear a minister in
council say he is voting for anything for the good the community as a
whole . /
