iraq friends & brothers not long ago, abdul karim
kassem, lean and psychotic strongman of iraq, boasted that he had
survived 38 attempts to kill him over the past 4f years . last week in
baghdad, death kept the 39th appointment . rebel iraqi army officers
overthrew the government and issued a characteristic middle eastern
communique : " with the help of god, we have been able to destroy the
enemy of god and of the people, abdul karim kassem, and his gang, who
have used the country for their own interests and who choked liberty
and disrupted the law ! " home & headquarters . the insurrection
began on friday, holiest day of the moslem week, and in the midst of
ramadan, the month when good moslems fast every day from sunup to
sundown and tempers are everywhere short . army trucks and tanks were
already rumbling through the streets when at 9 : 30 a.m., a strident
new voice on radio baghdad began exulting, " this is the voice of the
iraqi revolution ! " accusing " kassem the dictator " of having "
murdered citizens, weakened the army, imprisoned and executed scores of
officers, " the broadcaster claimed that the rebels " have destroyed
the tyrant ! " but the fight was only beginning . rebel units
surrounded baghdad's huge, yellow brick defense ministry, the home and
headquarters of premier kassem, which was defended by 600 trusted
soldiers . the rebels brought up tanks and heavy artillery, and iraqi
fighter planes strafed and bombed the kassem fortress . loyal disciple
. the rebel radio voice frenziedly called for the " people " to pour
into the streets " to destroy the remnants of the kassem regime . "
between exhortations, martial music filled the air, especially songs
extolling arab unity, and alahu akbar (god is great), a favorite hymn
of egypt's gamal abdel nasser . the six-man rebel junta that plotted
kassem's overthrow was apparently made up of captains and lieutenants,
except for its leader, ex-paratroop colonel abdul mustafa . but the man
they put forward as their front man came as a shock to kassem, fighting
for his life inside the battered defense ministry . the junta named as
its new rebel head of state colonel abdul salam aref, 41, long kassem's
closest friend and most loyal disciple, and alive only because kassem
commuted his 1959 death sentence . unshared prize . to kassem the coup
must have seemed only too familiar . in the same way back in 1958,
kassem seized power by ruthlessly slaughtering king feisal ii and his
iron-fisted, prowestern premier, nuri as-said, who was caught trying to
escape the city dressed in women's clothes . in those days kassem was a
brigadier, with the reputation of being the king's most loyal soldier .
actually, he was leader of a group of army conspirators including
mercurial colonel abdul salam aref, a passionate pronasserite . after
the young king was slain, kassem appointed himself premier,named aref
as his deputy, and proclaimed his dedication to " improving the living
standards of our population and saving them from living in slums .
two friends & brothers even though aref devotedly declared, /
i am kassem's son, " and bachelor kassem fondly called aref " my son,
my pupil, my brother, " the two chiefs were soon quarreling . having
become master of iraq, kassem was in no mood to share the prize with
aref's other hero, egypt's nasser . ordered into exile as ambassador to
west germany, aref pulled a gun in kassem's presence but was disarmed
and finally condemned to death as a traitor . kassem changed the
sentence to life imprisonment and in 1961 sentimentally and imprudently
set aref free . insecurely in control, and subject to vituperative
attacks from nasser's radio cairo, kassem eagerly accepted the support
of iraq's well-organized communist party, wangled $800 million in arms
and economic aid from the soviet bloc, and voted the communist line in
the united nations . spartan cot . kassem's brief regime reads like a
case history in dangerous living . he savagely put down one abortive
revolt, narrowly escaped death in an assassination attempt in which his
arm and hand were shattered by bullets . understandably gun-shy, he
spent most of his time inside the defense ministry building, where he
slept on a spartan cot and watched suspiciously for trouble . there was
plenty of that . half of iraq's army was tied down by a rebellion of
the kurdish tribesmen north and east of mosul . kassem began to grow
suspicious of iraq's communists ; after a series of red-inspired
strikes, kassem jailed hundreds of reds and condemned to death 28
communist leaders . and always he had to fear disaffection in his own
army . he was promising even greater army purges when last week the
rebels struck . after more than ten hours of hard fighting, the defense
ministry was in ruins and kassem's disheartened defenders surrendered .
kassem was alive, but only for a little while . the rebel iraqi radio
announced that he had been " tried " on the spot, condemned and, at 90
minutes past noon the next day, stood against a wall and executed . at
the moment (though victories are often perishable in arab politics),
the revolt seemed an impressive triumph for egypt's nasser, even if he
had no direct hand in it . if so, there would be trouble for the
hard-pressed kings of jordan and saudi arabia, as well as for the
britishprotected sheiks of the persian gulf . " kassem has gone ; soon
kings saud and hussein will go too, " said a complacent egyptian in
cairo . but first, nasser's supporters were confident that the iraqi
coup would set off a succession of uprisings in neighboring syria,
which has already put down two pro-nasser revolts since breaking off
from egypt in 1961 .
