west germany waiting for the call economics minister ludwig
erhard, that pudgy and popular fellow, has been itching to get his
hands on the top job in west germany, and can hardly wait for
chancellor konrad adenauer to retire as promised next fall . he has
shyly nudged der alte before, only to be rapped harshly on the knuckles
. last week erhard puffed up his chest and tried again . to a munich
newspaper, ludwig declared his willingness to take over right now . " i
would be ready to accept a call to the chancellorship if my party and
the bundestag so decided, " he announced, clearly hoping that others
felt as he did . after all, many of west germany's restive politicians
had been grumbling over charles de gaulle's courtship of der alte,
wondering whether the price of germany's new friendship treaty with
france was an unacceptable subservience to france, and whether it
required siding with the french against both britain and the u.s . no
support . but when erhard sat back to listen for the expected cries of
support, there was nothing but silence . he had overreached himself .
at the first cabinet meeting after erhard gave out his
readiness-to-serve interview, konrad adenauer simply smiled and agreed
with every complaint poor ludwig could think of . would the chancellor
flatly endorse britain's entry into the common market ? he demanded .
of course, adenauer agreed blandly . would adenauer declare that nato
and close relations with the u.s . were the basis of bonn's diplomacy
? naturally, smiled der alte . then came the clanger . would adenauer
disassociate himself from de gaulle's ideas of creating a third force
between east and west ? snapped der alte : of course not, no need
for it . de gaulle had never even discussed such thoughts with him ;
besides, west germany is opposed to such a policy . running out of
steam and questions erhard looked around the room for support from
foreign minister gerhard schroder and defense minister kai-uwe von
hassel . they, like erhard, are probritish, and like erhard, have grave
reservations about adenauer's comradeship with de gaulle . but neither
was prepared to bring down the government ; schroder found a sudden
fascination in his thumbnails ; von hassel shuffled papers . neglected
conscience . next day, at a caucus of the ruling christian democrats
and their allies, adenauer chided erhard mercilessly for presuming to
seek control of the government . when the cabinet finally voted on
adenauer's demand that the franco-german pace be ratified immediately,
erhard's nein was overwhelmingly defeated . for the chancellor, there
was now only the bundestag to be dealt with . konrad adenauer, 87,
handled the situation with deft ease . the franco-german treaty " is
not a substitute for european integration, " he told the assembled
legislators . " it is merely one of the essential prerequisites . " as
a matter of fact, declared der alte, de gaulle " promised me that the
first subject of joint consultation after the treaty goes into effect
will be british entry " into the common market . as for the atlantic
alliance, " europe knows that it cannot defend itself without the
support of the united states . i underline again our repeatedly
expressed intention of organizing our defense in the framework of nato
/ ludwig erhard sat silent throughout adenauer's performance, showed no
emotion even when der alte turned to the economic matters which are
erhard's speciality and said : " chancellor erhard will . . . i mean
minister erhard . . . " both sides of the house dissolved in laughter as
adenauer permitted himself a rare grin . " malicious critics will think
i did that on purpose, " he said . " but i assure you i did not . well,
maybe having a laugh in the middle of such a boring government
statement is a good thing . " at week's end, erhard was right where he
had always been, groping for the top rung of the ladder . and konrad
adenauer was in his accustomed place on top .
