australia a friend of miss x to his australian acquaintances,
soviet embassy first secretary ivan feodorovich skripov seemed a
likable sort, as soviet diplomats go . he was a good talker, an
enthusiastic partygoer and a back-slapping practical joker who often
laced his guests' beer with vodka, guffawing when they caught on . but
amiable ivan was more than a spoofer . he was also a spy . his
escapades began early in 1961, when he met a trim young woman
identified only as " miss x " at the zoo in sydney's taronga park and
recruited her as a soviet agent . she seemed willing, but to test her
trustworthiness, he conducted a couple of tests, feeding her money $592
in all and handing her minor assignments . once she had to pick up a
small cylinder concealed in a water meter ; another time she found one
hidden in the iron railing of a stairway . the black cross . skripov
then sent her a letter written in invisible ink and signed " theresa .
/ with chemical capsules furnished by skripov, miss x brought the
writing out, learned that she was to pick up a parcel concealed under a
tombstone in a cemetery, " the third from the one with a black cross
with the letters ihs . " convinced by now that miss x was trustworthy,
he handed her a big job . she was to deliver a paper-wrapped parcel to
a man in adelaide who would identify himself with a password . what
skripov did not know was that miss x had been working for australian
intelligence all along, and she simply turned the parcel over to
government agents . inside they found coded transmission timetables for
a soviet radio station, along with a small, high-speed radio message
sender . after waiting two anxious months for miss x to carry out her
task, skripov last week learned what had gone wrong . the australian
government sent a note to the embassy ordering him out of the country
in seven days for having made " elaborate preparations for espionage .
/ australian officials would not say what secrets skripov had been
seeking, but last week thousands of workers at the big woomera missile
range some 750 miles from canberra were undergoing interrogation .
lovable diplomat . australia's swift expulsion of skripov is
understandable . in 1954, mvd colonel vladimir petrov, who also had
been posing as a lovable diplomat, defected to the west with an armful
of secret documents that described widespread soviet snooping
operations down under . caught red-handed, the russians broke off
diplomatic relations, did not reopen their canberra embassy for five
years . this time, australia had equally convincing proof 25 photos
taken of skripov's meetings with miss x . for the moment, there was no
talk of a new break-off in relations . moscow prudently announced that
skripov's boss, ambassador ivan f . kurdiujov, home on sick leave,
would not be returning to australia .
