malaysia birth pains the suspects never slept in the same house
on successive nights . many had their photos in an " arrest on sight "
mug file at police headquarters . to avoid detection on singapore's
teeming streets, they spent much of their time in latenight movie
houses . but last week the dragnet was out . sweeping through the
island state, government security police rounded up 115 pro-communist
subversives and labor agitators opposed to singapore's inclusion, with
malaya and britain's borneo dependencies of sarawak, brunei and north
borneo, in a proposed malaysian federation of 10 million people . as
malaysia's birth date draws nearer, indonesia's president sukarno is
doing all he can to prevent it . his government continually blusters
about intervening militarily in british borneo . authorities in
singapore feared that local communists might try to sabotage british
bases on the island in order to hamper british retaliation in borneo .
sukarno is also making muscles against malaya, which would be the
dominant state in the new federation . djakarta has excluded malayan
fishermen from their traditional fishing grounds off the coast of
sumatra . an indonesian gunboat recently sank a fully laden rubber
barge inside malayan territorial waters . indonesia knows that a
pro-western, anti-communist federation would put a serious crimp in
sukarno's ambition to absorb oil-rich brunei and its two neighbors . he
also is anxious as usual for an issue to deflect mounting public
criticism over indonesia's growing economic crisis . fearing that
sukarno is itching to start something, malaya's prime minister tunku
(prince) abdul rahman appealed to london for reinforcements . the
british obligingly put 2,000 crack troops on a 72-hour alert to
reinforce its southeast asia forces, because of " the possibility of
outside interference . " the philippines are also covetous of north
borneo . at a meeting in london, the philippines maintained that in
1878 the filipino sultan of sulu had only " leased " north borneo to
the british and that the land actually still belonged to the filipino
government . behind the claim is the fear that malaysia would not be
able to prevent leftists in the federation and in indonesia from making
north borneo a communist enclave hard by the philippines' outer islands
. the british government, which is ardently behind malay's plans for
malaysia, stiffly rejected the philippine claim, gave notice that it
would push for the final creation of the new nation by aug . 31 .
