japan noose or pneumonia ?, one day in 1948, a well dressed
middle aged man walked into a branch of tokyo's teikoku bank
wearing the armband of a municipal official . claiming that he was a
city health inspector, the man ordered the bank manager to summon all
his employees so that he could give them a dose of anti-dysentery
medicine . the employees gulped the potion, then collapsed in agony .
from the open vaults, the medicine man grabbed about $185 in cash and
disappeared into the street . behind him, twelve people lay dead of
cyanide poisoning . then began the hunt . from witnesses, artists drew
a composite picture of the robber . eight month after the robbery,
police finally nabbed a prime suspect : a 57-year-old professional
painter named sadamichi hirasawa . hirasawa first admitted his guilt,
then retracted the confession . he was tried, convicted, and sentenced
to hang . two out of 40 . last week, eight years after his last appeal
was denied, hirasawa, now 72, was still in jail under a death sentence
japanese artists, writers and intellectuals have rallied to his
support and lawyers have protested against the severity of the sentence
. " it seems to me, " says one former tokyo magistrate, " that the
evidence was pretty flimsy . " the judge might have a point . hirasawa
insisted that the repudiated confession was extracted from him by
torture in a brutal nonstop interrogation . later, the painter's two
sons-in-law claimed that he was playing cards with them at the time of
the robbery . only two of the 40 eyewitnesses of the crime positively
identified hirasawa as the robber and both were increasingly unsure as
the trial wore on . the only clue pointing to hirasawa was the calling
card of the supposed health inspector, which the robber had left behind
in the bank ; handwriting experts determined that the writing on the
back of the card was hirasawa's . the painter never denied that he
once had the card, but claimed that it had been stolen from him when
his wallet was pickpocketed shortly before the robbery . painting in
the death house three japanese appellate courts have upheld the
original
verdict, but the rapid turnover of justice ministers in ten cabinet
reshuffles since 1955 has helped keep hirasawa alive . " if their
hearts were in it, they could have read the record and signed the death
warrant long ago,  says one former japanese judge . but they were
afraid, and i would be, too . " hirasawa has applied for a new trial,
but his application has no legal staying force on the order of
execution . to focus attention on his case, hirasawa's supporters
arranged for an exhibition of 50  of the 480 tempera paintings that he
has turned out in his 15 years in the death house . hirasawa's backers
have also circulated copies of the original composite newspaper drawing
of the robber in hopes of turning up new suspects . last november state
officials moved the painter from tokyo prison to remote, unheated
miyagi detention house in northern japan where all japanese executions
are carried out . " he was moved up there to die, but not by hanging, /
says one of his supporters . " the government hopes he'll die up there
faster of natural causes, because miyagi is cold and unhealthy . that
way, they can keep his blood off their hands officially .
