france the life of one man the shaking up that the
atlantic alliance got last month was the work of a single man . and
france's claim to dominate western europe and to be reckoned with as
the leader of a third force is also the lengthening extension of that
man . those of his allies who have to deal with le grand charles
sometimes find that their exasperation exceed their admiration . but
any way one looks at it, whether as an ally or as a frenchman worrying
about the chaos that might follow his death, there is a lot riding on
the towering man in the elysee palace . he is 72, and he has enemies
desperate enough to want to kill him . last week, as frenchmen closely
followed the news of a trial of would-be assassins of de gaulle, the
government announced a fresh attempt on de gaulle's life . armored car
. the night before de gaulle was to inspect the ecole militaire on the
left bank near the eiffel tower, paris gendarmes swarmed over the
ground, searching the buildings for weapons and interrogating officer
students and teachers . de gaulle showed up next day on schedule, but
(in a concession to danger rare for him) cooped up inside an armored
citroen limousine with bulletproof windows . according to the official
story from surete headquarters on the rue des saussaies, police had
discovered a plot on a civilian's tip, in the nick of time . after
interrogating the five suspects, the police indicated that the
triggerman was navy captain robert poinard, 37, who was held for
questioning along with his blonde young wife . according to the police
supposition, captain poinard was to use a carbine with a telescopic
sight to kill de gaulle while he was inspecting the honor guard in the
cobbled ecole militaire courtyard . two other officers were also in
custody, but the oddest of the suspects was the alleged ringleader, mme
. paule rousselot de liffiac, 55, a pipe-smoking, low-salaried english
translator at the school, the mother of six children, who was picked up
at her 15-room, 18th century chateau in a town south of lyon . the
ecole militaire, where napoleon learned to soldier, is the top academy
for the french military, and a hotbed of antigaullism among the
veterans of algeria who think he let them down . shrewd delay . algeria
was a word much spoken also in a courtroom in suburban vincennes, where
nine would-be assassins were on trial for having tried to kill de
gaulle last august in an ambuscade at petit-clamart, a paris suburb .
as has so often happened in france since the dreyfus case of the 1890s,
the trial was not confined to pertinent evidence but blossomed into a
national political affair . very few frenchmen had much sympathy for
the defendants, but many had grave doubts about how they were being
tried . de gaulle's chosen instrument for the trial was the special
court of military justice, from whose verdict there is no appeal, which
was set up last year and was to end its existence on feb . 25 . the
defendants' attorneys shrewdly tried to delay proceedings until that
date so that the case would have to start all over again in a regular
court, from which appeals could be taken . but de gaulle moved to fit
the law to his needs.his cabinet swiftly approved a bill extending the
life of the special court of military justice, and the bill was passed
by de gaulle's assembly 271-170 (the senate last week stubbornly voted
the bill down but, like britain's house of lords, is powerless to
overturn decisions of the lower house .
the defendants at vincennes were an odd,
and oddly frightening, lot . most of them were slack-jawed youths who
seemed equally lacking in confidence and intelligence . one was an army
lieutenant with the old, aristocratic breton name of bougrenet de la
tocnaye, and a head reeling with heroic memories of his family's feats
of arms dating back to the crusades . the leader, lieut . colonel
jean-marie bastien-thiry, 35, who had graduated from the famed
polytechnique and served as a brilliant air force engineer, revealed
himself as a man who put great industry, intelligence and logic to work
within a framework of mad zeal . all nonsense . though refusing to
recognize the jurisdiction of the court, bastien-thiry agreed to answer
questions, " because it is necessary for the french people to know why
we have acted and how we have acted . " his story was fantastic,
incredible, and thoroughly french . to begin with, explained
bastien-thiry, the ambush had not been intended to kill de gaulle, only
to capture him . to this end, the assassins who were all " crack shots
/ had fired at the tires of de gaulle's car . as a witness for the
prosecution, de gaulle's son-in-law, colonel alain de boissieu, who was
riding beside the chauffeur, testified that he saw a man pouring a
stream of bullets at the car, and recalled, " he did not seem to be
aiming his submachine gun at the tires, but quite obviously at the
passengers . " to the chauffeur, boissieu snapped, " down the middle .
straight ahead ! " then he turned around, begged de gaulle, who was
still sitting upright, to bend down . de gaulle obliged by leaning
forward slightly . defendant bastien-thiry airily dismissed as "
technical incidents " the additional evidence that the car windows were
shattered by bullets, a motorcycle cop's helmet drilled through, and de
gaulle's head missed only by inches . if they had captured de gaulle,
the conspirators intended to hide him away in a villa " between paris
and versailles, " and planned to prevent his escaping by removing his
spectacles and suspenders . after several weeks, de gaulle would be
tried by the national council of the resistance (the successor to the
algerian secret army organization), and presumably executed . with de
gaulle disposed of, the national council of the resistance planned to
appoint a new head of state : none other than de gaulle's present
finance minister valery giscard d'estaing . giscard d'estaing said it
was all nonsense, that he had never even met bastien-thiry and had no
links with either the secret army or the council of the resistance .
the wild rhetoric of the defendants could not conceal the implacable
determination to kill . la gloire summons frenchmen in many directions
. five of the gunmen who took part in the petit-clamart ambush are
still at large, including the most dangerous of all, georges watin, 39,
nicknamed boiteux (the limper), who the police say was also the brains
behind the ecole militaire plot . a french cabinet minister, emerging
from a meeting at the elysee palace last week, said worriedly to a
friend : " never had de gaulle's life been in such danger . /
