kashmir talking at last the british raj, which once
controlled india's northwest frontier province of kashmir, exacted a
token annual tribute of two kashmiri shawls and three handkerchiefs
from the maharajah . never since has the price of peace been as small .
in the years after independence in 1947 split the indian subcontinent
into the sovereign states of india and pakistan, the two nations have
paid with strife and bloodshed to establish their conflicting claims
over the disputed region . last week, after 15 years of bitter
wrangling, indian and pakistani delegates finally met in the pakistan
capital of rawalpindi to seek a solution to the kashmir problem . the
disputed land is the size of minnesota, lakes and all . it falls from
the windwhipped mountains of gilgit and ladakh in the north to the
idyllic vale of kashmir . in the himalayas, primitive mountain
tribesmen keep herds of graceful, sure-footed kashmir goats, whose soft
fleece becomes the cashmere of fifth avenue and regent street ; the
cool lakes near kashmir's capital city of srinagar are dotted with the
elegant houseboats of wealthy indians . vow forgotten . at the time of
partition, kashmir, like all of india's 562 princely states, was given
the choice of joining either pakistan or india . the fact that 77 per
cent of kashmir's 4,200,000 people were moslem pointed to control by
moslem pakistan . but though he had signed preliminary trade and
administrative agreements with pakistan, kashmir's hindu maharajah
began to hedge . angered by his failure to accede to pakistan, hordes
of pakistani " volunteers " swept into kashmir to establish pakistan's
claim to the land . in terror, the hindu ruler opted to join india,
appealed for immediate military aid . india was happy to respond,
airlifted troops into kashmir to fortify its own claim . thus began a
full-scale war in kashmir . india went to the united nations for relief
. in 1949 the u.n . demarcated a cease-fire line that gave india the
richest two-thirds of kashmir, including most of ladakh, the vale, and
the predominantly hindu area of jammu . but india's prime minister
jawaharlal nehru had pledged that " the fate of kashmir must ultimately
be decided by its people . " declared nehru : " we are prepared, when
peace, law and order have been established, to have a referendum under
some international auspices like the u.n . " nehru soon forgot that
vow, for it became obvious that kashmir would vote either for
independence or accession to pakistan . indian kashmir's moslem ruler,
sheik mohammed abdullah, an old friend of nehru's and a fiery kashmiri
nationalist, confused things by starting to promote a local
independence movement . india clapped sheik abdullah into jail in 1953
and introduced a series of repressive measures to halt other
nationalist or propakistan movements . except for three months in 1958,
sheik abdullah has languished in prison ever since, was last week on
trial on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government . nudge from
the north . the imprisonment of sheik abdullah symbolized all of
pakistan's deep distrust of nehru . despite his outward devotion to the
u.n., no amount of u.n . pressure could bring nehru to the bargaining
table with pakistan over kashmir . but when red china thrust deep into
india's himalayan borderland last october, nehru reluctantly yielded to
the insistent envoys of the u.s . and britain who suggested that unless
india and pakistan settled their differences, there would be little
hope of defending the subcontinent against chinese aggression .
hotheaded extremists in both countries opposed the idea of talks .
kashmir is not for sale, screamed an indian headline ; in pakistan's
national assembly, politicians argued that communism was far less an
evil than " hindu domination . " where was the room for negotiation ?
officially pakistan maintained that an overall plebiscite is the only
solution to the problem . but privately pakistan has fallback
positions, is willing to hold regional referendums that would give
india both jammu and ladakh . the real issue, however, was kashmir's
vale . pakistan seemed agreeable to the internationalization of the
important region . nehru, however, feared that secession of any part of
kashmir would encourage separatist movements in other indian states
with strong nationalist tendencies . nevertheless, indian officials
showed up in rawalpindi for the start of negotiations last week . they
were prepared for almost any surprise but the one that actually arrived
. on the eve of the conference, pakistan suddenly announced an
agreement " in principle " with red china for a complete settlement of
their mutual border differences . to the indians it was a stunning
blow, for it seemed that the pakistanis were deliberately using the
chinese bogeyman to blackmail them into yielding better terms on the
kashmir question . after two days of no progress, the rawalpindi talks
were adjourned for three weeks .
