iraq green armbands, red blood a week after the overthrow
iraq's dictator abdul karim kassem, the crack of rifle fire still
echoed in baghdad's liberation square . tanks and armored cars kept
stern vigil at every important intersection . scurrying everywhere were
the little squads of men wearing green armbands ferrets who sought to
find and to crush the last remaining opposition to rebel president
abdul salam aref and his mysterious revolutionary backers . who were
these new rulers ? in the modern mode, aref, 41, gritted his teeth
and presented himself at the baghdad hotel for the inevitable press
conference with the swarm of foreign correspondents, an ordeal he
seemed to regard as in some ways worse than the historic night of the
coup itself . more than a hundred shouting reporters and photographers
pushed aside his tommy-gun-waving guard and crowded around iraq's boss
to hear aref speak freely about the aims and purposes of the new
government . he said something about an end to one-man rule, friendship
with all arab states, and the " overcoming of all the difficulties
facing the iraqi people . " but he was mysteriously silent about the
size or membership of the all-powerful national council of the
revolutionary command, which organized and led the revolt against
kassem . no personalities . said aref : " this is a secret which must
remain a secret for many reasons . " asked why, englishspeaking aref
replied volubly in arabic . pressed again for an answer, aref suddenly
announced, " the conference is closed, " and departed, surrounded by
his guards . the reason for such secrecy seems to be a general
revulsion against the selfglorification of kassem's four-year
dictatorship . " we revolted against the cult of personality, "
explained new foreign minister talib hussein shabib, 32 . to the key
question of who is boss of the new iraq, the answer seems to be : at
the moment, no one man . president aref cannot make major decisions
without the concurrence of the mysterious national council . but highly
visible was the new 21-man cabinet, and most western observers liked
what they saw . said one : " in general, they're a topnotch bunch of
responsible, eager, exceptionally well-educated people . " many of the
ministers have lived or have been educated in the west, ranging from
foreign minister shabib, who graduated from london university and is
married to an englishwoman, to finance minister salih kubba, who
attended the university of california and has an international
reputation as an economist . seven of the new cabinet ministers were in
kassem's concentration camp at rashid military base until the rebels
broke down the gates during the coup . the baath idea . the new
government is clearly anti-communist, and all but five ministers are
either members of or closely linked to the baath (renaissance) party .
more an idea than an ideology, the basic baath doctrine insists that "
there are no arab nations ; there is only one arab nation . " this
creed is, of course, warmly embraced by egypt's gamal abdel nasser, but
aref and iraq's baath party seem hardly eager to fall under cairo's
domination . the baathist leaders in iraq, in fact, have reshaped their
doctrine of arab unity into a concept of federation of arab states
without a centralized dictatorship . this could mean anything,
including a revival of the old concept of loose unity in the " fertile
crescent " iraq, syria, jordan and lebanon . already syria, having
broken free from nasser, was proposing federation to iraq's new leaders
. the ideas of the new iraqis seem liberal, humane and democratic . but
so did kassem's program when he first seized power ; his reign swiftly
drifted to brutality and degradation . normal torpor . by week's end
iraq seemed settling down into the normal torpor of an arab state after
a coup d'etat . oil flowed uninterruptedly through the pipelines to the
mediterranean . shops, schools, and government offices reopened . the
curfew was gradually extended from 3 in the afternoon until 11 at
night, and in the coffeehouses men were gossiping and playing
backgammon .
the local communists, the
only group still supporting the discredited kassem regime, were being
stridently urged by moscow's powerful arabic voice in east germany to "
struggle against the fascist imperialist regime now foisted on iraq . "
some communists responded by sniping from rooftops, but their
organization had suffered a devastating blow . hundreds of the dogged
men with green armbands, carrying mimeographed lists of red leaders
complete with home addresses and auto license numbers, methodically
hunted down the communists, who had grown strong in kassem's final
months . by last week the new regime had killed or jailed nearly 2,500
dissident communists . this was enough to win the applause of western
diplomats . but anyone who had witnessed the perilous passage of other,
earlier revolts with laudable ambitions, could only hope that the
rebels would stop the shooting and start running the country . in the
long run, guns will hardly serve the new regime better than they served
abdul karim kassem .
