great britain 2-12 the other harold the labor party last week chose a
new leader to carry its banner against the tories in britain's coming
general election . the winner : harold wilson, 46, a pipe-smoking
intellectual with a phenomenal memory, a following of mixed admirers,
and a love of political combat . wilson's  victory was a crushing blow
to his chief rival, comradely george brown, 48, a staunch trade
unionist and ex-truck driver, who as acting party leader since the
death last month of hugh gaitskell, had every reason to believe that he
would inherit the mantle of leadership . but when the voting began last
week, it was george brown's old friends among labor's trade unionists
who abandoned him first . some opposed his pro-common market views ;
others among labor's intellectual center and right flinched at the
thought of a workingclass, up-from-the-ranks prime minister, and
preferred to go to the country with an oxford graduate and economics
don like wilson . respectability means a lot to the labor party . high
mortality . " no one knows harold, really, " says a friend . but at a
press conference last week, jammed with reporters and tv cameras,
wilson set out smoothly and competently to leave the right impression .
he regretted the " tragic event " of gaitskell's death " that created
this vacancy . " he diplomatically declared that " a great deal of
credit must go to george brown " for keeping the party together in the
interim . finally, wilson stated his three main objectives : " first,
to maintain the unity of the party that hugh gaitskell handed on ;
second, to continue those policies worked out under his leadership . . .
thirdly, to lead the party to victory in the coming general election .
/ in the past decade, labor's strength has been sapped by internal
bickering and by the loss of many of its ablest men (gaitskell, sir
stafford cripps, ernest bevin, aneurin bevan) . the feuding has faded,
and labor finds itself in the best shape in years to topple the
government of prime minister harold macmillan . a gallup poll last week
indicated that labor had a 15f per cent lead over the conservatives,
the lowest the tories have been in eleven years in power . beveridge's
boy . deepening unemployment and a faltering economy account more for
tory unpopularity than its recent defeat on the common market .
macmillan has until fall 1964 to call an election at the time most
advantageous to himself . much will depend on the skill with which
wilson exploits tory weaknesses and demonstrates labor's right to
govern . the son of an industrial chemist, james harold wilson was born
march 11, 1916, in the heart of industrial yorkshire, and spent his
childhood in a hillside village overlooking the factory smoke of the
colne valley . at the local council school, he won the first of a
series of scholarships that eventually carried him to oxford's jesus
college, where he was a leading member of the debating society and a
cross-country runner . graduating with first class honors, wilson
remained at oxford as an economics don until the war, ending up in the
ministry of fuel and power . sir william beveridge employed him as a
researcher for his famed social insurance report, and called wilson a "
brilliant young man " and " the best economist i've ever had . " in
1945 wilson stood for office for the first time, and, in the election
that threw winston churchill out of office, won a lancashire seat
handily by 7,022 votes . two years later, when wilson became president
of the board of trade at 31, he was the youngest cabinet member since
william pitt . littered house . among his constituents or at his
red-brick home in hampstead garden suburb, wilson is affable, easygoing
and well-liked . his wife mary, the daughter of a baptist minister,
writes poetry and is active in her local church ; his two sons, robin,
19, and giles, 14, litter the house with sports gear and mackintoshes .
but in the house of commons, the reaction to wilson is generally one of
uneasy suspicion, and he is frequently accused of being " slippery . "
as the economist put it last week, " on the big things defense, the
american alliance, east-west, the need to give labor a twentieth
century look mr . wilson has been consistently ambiguous, indeed
deliberately and cleverly so . these are the reasons for more than
doubt about his leadership . " having quit the labor cabinet in 1951,
along with firebrand aneurin bevan, wilson has inherited much of
bevan's leftwing support . but in the cabinet his main administrative
achievement was the dismantling of a vast array of controls on
britain's postwar economy . he has always been more pragmatic than
doctrinaire or opportunistic, his enemies say . in a commons speech
last week he declared, " what i am saying may or may not be
ideological, but it will get the export orders . " with the left safely
on his side, wilson is shrewd enough to know that, as leader, he must
now conciliate the party's center and right . wilson carried on a mild
flirtation with the h-bomb " unilateralists " when he challenged
gaitskell for party leadership in 1960, and for a time plumped for
neutralism instead of nato . last week wilson reassured everybody that
the labor party " stands firmly by nato . " and he added, " we should
expect to have a very happy relationship " with washington . in a
recent commons speech he argued that britain should avoid the needless
expense of a separate nuclear deterrent, but nevertheless should have a
voice in deciding when the west (i.e., the u.s.) uses its nuclear power
: " there must be no annihilation without representation ! " with
his ready tongue and sharp mind, harold wilson will prove a formidable
adversary for prime minister harold macmillan (he was swiftly dubbed "
the other harold " ) . there is hardly an m.p . who has a better grasp
of parliamentary procedure or a better knack of turning it to his
side's advantage . he has already drawn blood with his slashing attacks
on the " vain nuclear posturing " of the macmillan government .
macmillan's relations with u.s . president john kennedy, said wilson,
reminded him of a " seedy uncle " receiving homilies from a young and
wealthy nephew . though it may be difficult to discover precisely where
harold wilson stands, there was little doubt last week about where he
intends to come to rest at 10 downing street .
