hungary gay until tomorrow like germany's riotous fasching
festival, hungary's farsang was traditionally a time to blow off steam
before the onset of lent's rigors . it was banned by hungary's red
rulers . but now, with their tolerance, farsang (pronounced forshong),
is making a comeback not so much as a pre-lenten spree as a chance to
escape the austerity of everyday life under communism . explained one
blonde merrymaker : " we celebrate from the morning after new year's
right through lent, and on to easter . " hungary's festival pales by
comparison with the old days, when magyar aristocrats would spit on a
100-forint note (worth about $12.50), slap it on a gypsy's forehead,
and demand passionate violinplaying until the spittle dried and the
note fell off . but all things considered, it is gay enough . at
budapest's press ball last week, young men in stovepipe trousers and
girls in daringly decollete dresses performed a writhing twist that
onlookers pointed to with a touch of pride as their own " dirty twist .
/ for the monster masked balls that punctuate the season, probably
100,000 costumes will be rented . at some events the men sport tuxedos
rented for 120 forints (the average hungarian earns 1,600 forints a
month, or $70 at tourist exchange rates), and the ladies wear old
remodeled party dresses . everybody throws a party : there is even a
ball of the administration of water economy . at the foresters' ball in
budapest's hotel gellert fortnight ago, 1,500 guests turned up,
including even a few foresters . gypsies provide the music, sawing out
strauss waltzes, wild hungarian csardas and songs by somebody listed as
/ colporter . " the balls go strong until dawn breaks over the danube .
for all the dancing, drinking and casual lovemaking, the festival has a
bittersweet air . after their night-long revels, budapest's residents
pick their way to work along pock-marked sidestreets, gaze absently at
the stripped-bark scaffolding on buildings gutted by soviet tanks
during the 1956 rebellion, queue up for the consumer goods that always
seem to be in short supply . the red army still stays prudently hidden
in its camps ringing budapest, and the hated avh secret police have
been replaced by a less conspicuously murderous bunch known as bkh, but
nobody is enthusiastic about the " permissiveness " shown lately by
premier janos kadar . don't let all this gaiety
fool you, " a budapest writer warned an american visitor after a
farsang ball . " the young people are gay because they are young . the
old people they are gay because they don't know what comes tomorrow . "
