south africa unhappy apart prime minister hendrik verwoerd's
grandiose scheme to transplant most of south africa's 11 million
natives into nine back-country, all-black bantustans was supposed to
put an end to the country's racial unrest . instead, it has only
increased the dangerous tension between black and white . the first
bantustan on verwoerd's list was the transkei, a denmark-size (16,500
sq . mi.) area of eroded farm land on the indian ocean . nobody knows
the troubles it has seen . ever since africans went on a rampage there
more than two years ago, murdering the government's handpicked tribal
chiefs and setting fire to entire villages, mobile police patrols armed
with sten guns, armored cars, and helicopter spotter planes have had to
stay on duty in parts of the transkei . fortnight ago, a white family
of four were capriciously hacked to death with pangas as they stumbled
down the steps of their burning trailer, set afire while parked on a
road only 30 miles from the transkei's capital of umtata . last week,
as the parliament in cape town prepared to debate a bill legally
establishing the transkei bantustan certain to pass the nationalist
party-controlled legislature, probably by june there was more trouble .
the government plans to make kaizer matanzima, a mission-educated tembu
chief, the chief minister of the new transkei government . the
bodyguard of a headman serving matanzima got into a tribal fight with
40 warriors armed with spears and axes . matanzima quickly mustered 500
men to crush the revolt, and south african police stood by with a
truckload of men and a helicopter . the rebels fled into the hills .
police blamed the trailer murders and the tribal outbreak on the
increasing influence of poqo (pronounced paw-kaw), an african terrorist
society whose members, like kenya's notorious mau mau, take secret
oaths and are heavily influenced by witch doctors . poqo fanatics
recently tried to assassinate matanzima because he frankly favors
apartheid as " the best solution " for south africa's racial troubles .
matanzima's powers to govern the transkei's 1,400,000 blacks, 15,000 to
20,000 whites, and 14,000 coloreds will be strictly limited . all
measures passed by the local legislature of tribal chiefs and elected
representatives are subject to veto by the central government ; cape
town still will control justice and internal security . money to
improve the barren region will be lacking . verwoerd has promised an
annual budget subsidy of $30 million, but this falls far short of
meeting the need for housing, schools, land reclamation, establishing
new industry . in addition, matanzima faces powerful political
opposition from another tembu chief, sabata dalindyebo, who does not
like the bantustan idea at all . dalindyebo demands multiracial
political rule " in which the color of a man's skin plays no part in
his civil rights . by accepting self-government, " he warns, " we fear
we will be enclosing ourselves in a pigsty .
