burma army socialism ever since general ne win tossed bumbling
premier u nu out of office last march, the only thing that has kept him
from rushing headlong into a program of industrial nationalization and
farm collectivization has been the influence of tough, handsome
brigadier aung gyi . last week the brakes were off . after a long feud
with leftist members in the 17-man revolutionary council, aung gyi "
most respectfully " asked strongman ne win " to relieve me of the
various duties to which i have been assigned . " as army vice chief of
staff, minister of trade and industry, and chairman of the burma oil
co., aung gyi was ne win's no . 2 man and heir apparent . the son of a
well-to-do chinese textile merchant and a burmese woman, he proved
himself a canny diplomat both in the 1960 negotiations that fixed
burma's borders with red china and in last month's talks with japan
that produced $170 million in additional world war ii reparations and
loans . despite his insistence that " i have no training in economics,
/ he built a modest army px-type operation into the giant burma
economic development corp., running 34 firms ranging from banking to
fisheries and turning handsome profits that in some years ran as high
as $2,500,000 . though he insisted that he had been a socialist for 20
years and intended to remain one for 20 more, in fact, he was a
tough-minded pragmatist who openly advocated cooperation with private
industry . inevitably, aung gyi's gradualism annoyed ne win, a soldier
who is no communist but has vowed to socialize burma as quickly as
possible . aung gyi earned the enmity of brigadier tin pe, a marxist
theorist and a key member of the revolutionary council . for months,
tin pe pressed for a faster switchover to state control ; aung gyi's
departure means that tin pe has finally won out . stripped of power,
aung gyi, 43, flew off to voluntary exile in an isolated burmese
village near the borders of china and india . at least four
high-ranking officers who shared his views were arrested or forced into
retirement . with the opposition out of the way, ne win declared that
the government would immediately take over the import and export
business, the rice trade and some private industries . burma's economy,
said he, would now come under " total state control . /
