communists 2-12 ah, foreign aid the communists have poured out their
millions too, trying to win the hearts and minds of africa . sometimes,
moscow must wonder whether it is worth all the effort . in bulgaria,
200 african university students on communist scholarships marched down
sofia's lenin boulevard toward the office of premier todor zhivkov to
protest government restrictions . instead of sympathy, they were met by
600 bulgarian militiamen, who flailed the africans with clubs and
hauled them off to jail . all the students had asked for was permission
to maintain an all-africa student union . like other africans in
eastern europe, the 350 african students in bulgaria found more
segregation than brotherhood, more indoctrination than education .
after the riot, ghana's ambassador lodged a strong protest with the
bulgarian government, and just about all of the africans in sofia
decided to pack up and seek education elsewhere . " we have been
insulted in every possible way, " said ghanaian agricultural student
robert kotey as he arrived in vienna . " we were molested in the
streets, called " black monkeys' and " jungle people,' and peopled used
to spit out before us on buses and trains . " concluded ghanaian
economics student kofi buckle : " we soon realized that to study in a
communist country is a bloody waste of time . " in guinea, once
regarded as a foothold of soviet penetration of africa, russia's stock
fell to a new low with l'affaire svetlana . it had to do with a blonde
russian exchange teacher named svetlana ushakova . against embassy
instructions, she persisted in making friends with the natives, and
ignored orders that she return to russia . fortnight ago, she was
hustled to a moscow-bound plane, only to be rescued by the guineans
themselves . on a second vain attempt to get svetlana to moscow,
russia's ambassador to guinea himself tried to pass her off as the
aircraft's stewardess . then a few days later, the russian cultural
attache and two aides snatched svetlana from a conakry restaurant and
sped off toward the airport . that was too much . the guineans tossed
all three into jail for the night, reinstalled svetlana in her school,
and began to wonder where foreign aid stops and foreign interference
begins .
