conferences the city of lost causes geneva is the
only city in the world to have gained fame and prosperity from
successive failures . this placid, tidy town lying on the shores of lac
leman and beneath mont blanc, the tallest of the alps, has been the
scene of some of humanity's most trying moments . it is a place where
great ideas turn to dust in the archives, and where nations exhausted
by war come to end their fighting . last week, like every week, geneva
resounded with the din of wrangling delegations . in another wearying
round of the nuclear test ban negotiations, the west refused to scale
down further its demands for on-site inspections, which stood at 20
annually three years ago, eight this winter, and seven last week . the
russians, who originally refused to permit any inspections, three years
agreed to " two or three, " and last week would not go higher . a
newsman who has covered geneva since 1947 says that habitual attendance
at east-west conferences results in a tendency to accept the arguments
of both sides : " you come to think that the russians object to
controls because they want to cheat, and the west insists on controls
because they want to spy in russia . you reach the conclusion that
everybody is equally wrong . " imposed deadline . a city of 182,000 and
the birthplace of jean jacques rousseau, as well as of the red cross,
geneva got into the conference business early . during the 16th
century, under reformer john calvin, geneva was the protestant rome .
in 1872 geneva's city hall was the headquarters of a five-man
commission that arbitrated a dispute between britain and the u.s . over
the damages caused by the british-built confederate raider alabama .
the luckless league of nations was established in geneva in 1920 .
after the league was erased by world war ii, the united nations took
over the vast palais des nations as its european base . geneva is to
diplomats what niagara falls is to honeymooners . every meeting of
every conference is filled to the brim with endless, multilingual talk
. only rarely does the palais, one of the world's largest office
buildings, come to life with such dramatic moments as emperor haile
selassie's moving speech against mussolini's invasion of ethiopia, or
the sight of french premier pierre mendes-france, watch in hand,
signing at 4 a.m . the accord ending the indo-china war to meet the
deadline he had set himself on taking office . 15 per cent jump . most
conference activity revolves around such annual fixtures as the world
health organization and the u.n . economic and social council . over
170 organizations have headquarters in geneva, ranging from the
international bureau of education to the world alliance of the y.m.c.a
. through much of february, 1,600 delegates from all corners of the
earth sat happily through long sessions of the united nations
conference on the application of science and technology for the benefit
of the less developed areas, a group known as uncscat for short .
meetings most often occur during
the good weather months, and usually afford sufficient time off for
delegates to enjoy the delights of mountain and beach . the permanent
u.n . employees in geneva lead a quiet, incestuous life made up of
intimate cocktail parties, small dinners and casual meetings in the
palais bar, which serves sandwiches so dismal that they are alleged to
be rejects from commercial airlines . the citizens of geneva, who are
mostly french-speaking swiss, ignore the permanent u.n . staff, the
delegates and the tourists, and devote themselves to making watches,
precision tools and, especially, money . an 18th-century french foreign
minister once advised a friend, " if you see a genevese jump out of a
window, jump right after him . there's 15 per cent to be gained . " but
as swiss cities go, which is slowly, geneva has a reputation for
wildness . in bern and zurich the sidewalks are rolled up at midnight,
but geneva's night spots can stay open until 4 a.m . police cannot
break into geneva hotel rooms and ask to see marriage licenses as they
can in most german swiss cities . geneva has only a few licensed
prostitutes but no susceptible visitor has ever been known to complain
of a lack of complaisant women . occasionally, there are criminal
activities . during the 1960 disarmament conference, sir michael
wright, chief british delegate, found a thief under his bed . and
cameroon's pro-communist politician, felix-roland moumie, died suddenly
after drinking four glasses of pernod that someone had spiked with rat
poison . poetic chef . the proprietors of geneva's 300 bars and 18
nightclubs, report that arab, south american and african delegates live
it up the most . communist bloc delegates usually remain dourly behind
the high stone walls of suburban villas . one popular bar, the navy
club, was founded by u.s . naval officers detailed to the 1954
indo-china peace conference . most restaurants are french and very good
; delegates who can afford it happily drive 30 miles to the fabulous
and expensive le pere bise, just across the frontier in france itself .
in geneva there are three chinese restaurants (one nationalist and two
red chinese), a vietnamese one whose chef is a poet, and even an arab
eating house, known fondly as chez farouk . for the athletic, geneva
boasts an american-run twelve-lane bowling alley, and for gamblers, two
casinos ; and for the prurient, there is a striptease joint called the
ba-ta-clan, whose huge red neon sign winks wickedly across from st .
pierre cathedral, where calvin delivered sermons laced with fire and
brimstone . for roues who want to keep going even after 4 a.m., a
second-floor establishment named the u.n . bridge club serves drinks
till dawn and polish love songs rendered by an italian barmaid .
unsigned treaty . despite the seeming aimlessness of most geneva
negotiations, there is a residue of idealism and optimism . last week
the british gave a farewell party for sir michael wright upon his
retirement as britain's chief nucleartalks representative . there was
an element of sadness, since sir michael had plainly hoped to end his
career by signing the east-west treaty . newsmen applauded warmly when
sir michael turned to his guest, senator hubert humphrey, and said, " i
hope your signature will be on the treaty . " if the treaty is ever
signed, geneva will have lost its present unwanted title of the " city
of lost causes . /
