berlin 2-12 willy wins in municipal elections held at the darkest hour
of the berlin blockade in 1948, west berliners showed their defiance of
the reds by giving their beloved mayor, ernst reuter, a record 64.5
per cent of
the popular vote . communism's wall has done nothing to reduce their
solidarity . last week, urged on by posters that warned " whoever stays
at home votes for the wall, " 90 per cent of eligible west berliners
trudged through foggy, snowy streets to give able mayor willy brandt,
reuter's protege, a landslide victory for another term in office .
brandt's socialists got almost 62 per cent of the 1,571,820 votes cast
; in the workers' stronghold of wedding, the district which brandt
chose as his personal constituency, he won more than 75 per cent of the
ballots . citywide, the puny communist party lost one-third of its
support, attracting just a shade more than 1 per cent of the vote .
brandt's victory was no surprise, for west berlin traditionally votes
socialist . what was startling was the size of the socialist gain, and
the sharp loss suffered by the west berlin faction of chancellor konrad
adenauer's christian democratic union . c.d.u . deputy mayor franz
amrehn lost to a little-known socialist, and overall c.d.u . strength
in the berlin house of representatives dropped 25 per cent . there
were, of course, local issues, but no one doubted that the c.d.u .
suffered from the tarnished image of adenauer's national party, which
has been slipping in local and state elections . recent discontent
focuses on the government's clumsy " treason " crackdown on the
newsmagazine der spiegel last november, and more important, on the
stubborn refusal of adenauer to clear the way for his own retirement
and choice of a new c.d.u . leader . with new national elections due in
1965, it is none too early for the christian democrats to start
building up a new candidate, whether he turns out to be vice chancellor
ludwig erhard, the fastrising foreign minister gerhard schroder, or one
of the party's dark horses . as for a socialist candidate for the
chancellorship, willy brandt, who was beaten once by adenauer, was sure
to be it again . and willy was willing .  " my work might be more
needed elsewhere, " he said .
