great britain guilty innocent one night in 1943, london police on
robbery detail stopped a seedy little man for routine questioning and
seemed to have stumbled on the solution of a murder in portsmouth, 65
miles away . harold loughan a brash habitual criminal volunteered the
information that he had crept into the rooms above the john barleycorn
pub three weeks before and, in committing a robbery, had strangled to
death the pub's owner, rose robinson . " it's a relief to get it off my
mind, "  he told the police .  " i didn't mean to kill the old girl,
but you know what it is when a woman screams . " confession v . alibi .
when the details of the confession checked out in portsmouth, loughan
was charged with murder . " i felt confident that i could not lose the
case even if i conducted it standing on my head, " recalls joshua david
casswell, who was the prosecutor in the court proceedings that followed
. but to casswell's chagrin, loughan dismissed his confession as the
kind of casual lie he enjoyed telling the police, claimed he spent the
night of the murder sheltered from the blitz in london's warren street
subway station and produced five independent witnesses to prove it . "
this is the most extraordinary case i've ever known, " said the judge .
/ on the one hand a full confession, and on the other an unshakable
alibi . " the jury, equally puzzled, could not reach a verdict . in a
retrial, loughan was acquitted . he was still gloating when arrested on
the steps of old bailey for another robbery and, after his 24th
conviction, sent to prison for seven years . that might have been the
last anybody heard of little harold loughan if the people, a
sensational london sunday newspaper, had not printed the memoirs of
prosecutor casswell . in one installment, casswell claimed that harold
loughan would have been convicted if all the evidence had been heard .
loughan, now 66 and in jail as usual, sued for libel, claiming he had
been called a murderer despite his official innocence . murder or libel
. the newspaper's lawyer argued that even if the articles did amount to
calling loughan a murderer, truth is a defense against libel, and
casswell had finally shown that loughan had indeed murdered rose
robinson 19 years ago . for eleven days the jury heard evidence of the
old murder with loughan still protesting his innocence . " you are
asked to try again a murder in the guise of a libel action, " his
lawyer complained to the jury . last week the jury returned its verdict
: the people was not guilty of libel because loughan was guilty of the
murder . loughan, of course, cannot be tried again for the same crime .
if the jury was correct, he had cheated the gallows . but that was
little comfort to harold loughan . after the trial he was returned to
the prison hospital where, after spending 23 of his 66 years behind
bars, he awaits death from inoperable cancer .
