middle east who's
wooing who ? in cairo, president gamal abdel nasser acted like an
ex-champion seeking a successful comeback . he lost much of his claim
for the title of arab leadership in 1961, when an army coup wrenched
syria from its short-lived merger with egypt in the united arab
republic . that left nasser without a single arab ally, and surrounded
by such virulent enemies as iraq's dictator kassem and the kings of
jordan and saudi arabia . then came last month's iraqi revolution and
the overthrow of kassem . no one could blame egypt's leader for harking
back to old dreams of arab grandeur, for this new man in baghdad
president abdul salam aref was a former nasser protege dedicated to
panarab unity . tribute to mother . with this in mind, nasser mounted a
platform in cairo's vast republic square last week to celebrate the
fifth anniversary of his defunct united arab republic . strings of
ramadan lights outlined the mosques and minarets, and a crowd of 20,000
jammed the square protected from the cold night air by a siwan, a "
hall " roofed and walled by brightly colored canvas . " union ! union
! union ! nasser ! nasser ! nasser ! " roared the mob . what
it got was a little less than nasser had hoped for . the leaders of the
iraqi delegation to the celebration, deputy premier ali saleh saadi and
foreign minister talib hussein shabib, were cordial enough, but they
were far from specific . saadi dutifully paid tribute to egypt as the "
mother republic " of the arab world, but instead of calling for union,
he urged only a /frank rapprochement " between cairo and baghdad . was
this enough sure, cried nasser in his own speech . today, he declared
/ there is a unity of objectives between the revolution in baghdad and
the revolution in cairo, " and " we do not need treaties or
constitutional forms to prove this unity . " jail for the dog . in
baghdad, new president aref and his colleagues were too busy learning
how to run a country to pay much attention . the slain kassem, now
dubbed " the mad tyrant, " had quarreled with all his neighbors . aref
was restoring trade relations with egypt, imports from lebanon and
exports to little kuwait, the oil-rich principality kassem once tried
to take over . tidying up another national problem, aref sent a
helicopter north to pick up two delegates of the kurdish rebels in the
hope that he might negotiate an end to the bloody civil war that has
tied up half the 75,000-man iraqi army ; he even made friendly
overtures to the u.s.-british controlled iraq petroleum co., which
kassem had alienated . as for the communists of baghdad, they were
still going into jails . the result was one of the biggest single red
propaganda barrages since the reds charged the u.s . with using germ
warfare in korea . pravda's correspondent claimed, " i saw tanks crush
women and children, " and reported the " physical annihilation of
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of iraqi democrats and patriots . " the
pravda man went looking for aziz sharif, a 1962 lenin peace prizewinner
at the office of the peace partisans league (a euphemism for red
militia) . a soldier on guard at the office told him, " that dog has
long since been jailed . " the soviet red cross even appealed to the
international red cross to help protect communists, whom it preferred
to call " the democratic patriots victimized by bloody persecution in
iraq . " when the first hectic days were over, the novices would get
around to answering gamal abdel nasser's cry for union . at week's end
iraq's thinking was summed up by foreign minister shahib, who proposed
a joint meeting of the four " liberated " arab states (iraq, egypt,
yemen, algeria) to " coordinate work among them in various fields with
a unionist revolutionary and socialist tendency .
