laos and then there were three in the eight months since the
14-nation geneva conference established laotian neutrality last summer,
neutralist prince souvanna phouma's left-right-center coalition
government has displayed a remarkable record of consistency : it has
failed to carry out one single provision of the geneva accords . rent
by internal dissension, the government has been unable to maintain a
cease-fire, evict all foreign military personnel from laos, integrate
the three military and political factions, or hold free elections . but
the supposedly " neutralist " government has recognized every country
in the communist bloc, and has done so little to halt the rampant
inflation that the price of the kip has risen from 80 to 180 per dollar
. on the plaine des jarres, headquarters of both the neutralist and
communist pathet lao armies, the reds have begun a campaign to
infiltrate and subvert the forces of their onetime neutralist allies .
farther north, thousands of red chinese workers have crossed into laos
to build roads linking china's yunnan province with communist-held
areas of laos itself . armed with new red chinese automatic weapons,
the pathet lao is attacking neutralist villages on the supply lines
between the plaine des jarres and communist north viet nam to the east
. many neutralists have openly defected to the reds, adding
to westerners' fears that laos is
going to the communists by default .
the reds' persistent subversion is alienating
the top neutralist commanders,
and last week an open split seemed a possibility .
while showing a movie at his
house on the plaine des jarres, the neutralist
army's second in command, colonel
ketsana vongsouvanh, was shot in the
back . at ketsana's funeral last week, neutralist army leader general
kong le, who once worked hand in glove with the pathet lao, made no
effort to conceal his disenchantment with his former cohorts . " this
odious crime, " said kong le, " was the work of those who are under a
foreign influence . " kong le restricted his troops to their base,
ordered the pathet lao to keep out of neutralist encampments . top
neutralist officers wondered where the reds would strike next . one
recalled that a ranking pathet lao officer told him last fall that the
communists had plans for kong le's top four subordinates . we are going
to thoroughly liquidate all four of you . " with ketsana's death, there
was one down and three to go .
