nigeria nation on trial in 1960, when nigeria won its
independence, it became at birth the world's most populous black state
and africa's biggest question mark . held together in uneasy
federation, the country numbered some 250 tribes and languages, three
principal religions (moslem, christian, animist), and three big,
traditionally hostile regions : the feudal, moslem north, which claims
half the entire population of nigeria ; the east, dominated by the
astute, industrious ibo tribes ; and the west, richest and most
advanced of all three, whose yoruba tribesmen are nigeria's most
sophisticated citizens . as big as texas and oklahoma combined, with
some 45 million inhabitants give or take 10 million nigeria seemed less
a nation than a concatenation, a haphazard creation of british
colonists who ruled it for 60 years and dubbed it the " white man's
grave . " nigeria has survived to become africa's most conspicuously
successful democracy . its birth pangs were eased by a long tradition
of tribal government, and by the solid good sense of many african
leaders whom the british groomed for self-rule notably its federal
prime minister, sir abubakar tafawa balewa (time cover, dec . 5, 1960)
. the greatest single assurance of stability has been nigeria's tripod
form of government, designed to prevent any one region from dominating
the other two . that system is now in jeopardy, and with it the very
future of nigeria as a democracy and as a nation . political play ?
nigeria's complex crisis is being played out in the scrupulously
decorous high court in the federal capital of lagos . there, in the
course of a trial that has dragged on for four months, the leader of
the opposition, obafemi awolowo, last week opened his own defense
against a government indictment charging him and 24 other leading
politicians with conspiracy to overthrow the government . nearly all
the defendants are members of awolowo's action group, the party that
rules western nigeria and represents it in the federal parliament .
chief awolowo is not alone in branding the trial a political play to
wreck his party and eliminate the opposition . the crisis was actually
precipitated by awolowo, 54, a mercurial, london-trained barrister who
became opposition leader in lagos when his party lost the 1959 federal
elections . awolowo then ranged his people firmly against the
middle-road coalition government, composed of the conservative northern
people's congress (npc), supported by the proud, primitive fulani and
hausa tribes of the north, and the progressive national convention of
nigerian citizens (ncnc), which is based in the east . smashed mace .
chief samuel l . akintola, who became deputy leader of the action group
and western region premier, last may rebelled against awolowo's
policies, was sacked as deputy leader and dismissed as the west's
premier (he was later reinstated by court order) . awolowo's
high-handed reprisals led to a chairthrowing melee in the western
region assembly at ibadan in which the ceremonial mace was shattered
and the politicians subdued with tear gas . seizing their chance to
quash the opposition, rival party bosses in lagos persuaded the
reluctant sir abubakar to dispatch federal forces to the west and
declare a state of emergency that was lifted only at year's end . the
government also initiated an exhaustive investigation of regional and
party finances, charged awolowo and other party chieftains with
diverting $18 million in public funds . on top of the corruption
scandals, the government last november filed its sensational indictment
accusing awolowo of sending agents to ghana for para-military training
as terrorists in a plot to seize power in lagos . universal dash .
chief awolowo last week scornfully termed " absolutely unreliable and
incredible " the prosecution's charges that he had conspired to " levy
war " against the government . " today, " he said defiantly, " i may be
languishing in prison . i am not going to die there . i still believe i
will be prime minister some day . /
as for the corruption charges, awolowo's
supporters argue that malfeasance is no less rife in the other regions
. they are probably quite right . " dash, " as nigerians cheerfully
call their ritualistic system of payoffs, is so universal that many
traffic cops have a fixed bribe for every violation (running a red
light costs 28 #$ ), and hospital nurses sometimes demand a penny for
bringing a patient a bedpan . members of parliament, whose cadillacs
and mercedeses help make lagos traffic jams among the worst in africa,
earn more ($17,000 including expenses) than british m.p.s, but many
manage to eke out the cost of living on ikoyi island with a little help
from foreign industrialists and local entrepreneurs . " nigerian
businessmen, " says a european banker in lagos, " are the biggest bunch
of con men i've ever seen . " for all their surface cynicism, nigerians
by contrast with most thin-skinned citizens of africa's new nations are
searchingly self-critical and take fierce pride in their exuberantly
uninhibited press . younger politicians in all the parties are
increasingly disillusioned by the flagrant venality of their elders and
the chasm that divides lagos' doyens of dash from the jobless hordes
who have swarmed into its festering slums and almost trebled the city's
population (to 750,000) in three decades . the best guarantee . many
young nigerians deride the government's faith in private enterprise,
and in international affairs they are openly impatient with the
incorruptible sir abubakar's pragmatic, unpretentious and rather
old-fashioned style . as africa's most populous nation, they argue,
nigeria is the continent's logical leader . " when you're in accra, "
complains a lagos newsman, " you cannot help feeling that you're at the
center of pan-african activity . why don't we get refugees from other
parts of africa ? " if the action group is destroyed by the treason
trial, many nigerians believe, a new, radical party will have to take
its place or else the nation's restive leftwingers may well resort to
real violence . meanwhile, though premier akintola has already formed a
new,moderate movement in the west called the united people's party, the
vacuum left by the action group may be filled by the ncnc, whose
longtime boss, dr . nnamdi ( " zik " ) azikiwe, is more or less removed
from active politics in his post as nigeria's governor-general . but
ambitious, flamboyant zik makes no secret of his aim to make nigeria a
republic, in which ncnc could emerge as the dominant national party and
zik himself might well be a strong president.many nigerians, shocked by
the government's seven-month suspension of civil rights, now fear that
a single, powerful party may be tempted to impose the kind of
authoritarian rule that has been riveted on ghana and guinea . the
government's most immediate concern is that the country's current
scandals will mar its reputation for stability and scare away the
foreign investors on whom it is counting for at least 50 per cent of
the financing for the $1.9 billion, six-year development plan it
launched last year . to sir abubakar, the social and economic progress
this will ensure is the best guarantee of meaningful nationhood for
nigeria .
