the allies the nato deterrent almost as old as nato
itself is the " disarray " that seems to haunt its councils . yet
allied differences are not so much symptoms of any deep-rooted disunity
as the result of nato's military effectiveness . because they know that
they are secure behind the u.s . nuclear shield, few european nations
are eager to build up conventional forces for which they see little use
. at the same time, as they have grown more powerful and prosperous,
europeans have come to question total u.s . control of nuclear weapons
for the foreseeable future . thus dependence breeds mistrust . charles
de gaulle is not the only european to fear that the u.s . cannot be
counted upon to risk destruction of its cities if russia were to attack
western europe despite repeated u.s . assurances of its long-term
strategic commitment to europe, and heedless of the fact that 400,000
g.i.s on the continent are a permanent u.s . hostage to europe's
security . yet neither france's embryonic force de frappe nor britain's
near-obsolete v-bomber strike force carries sufficient punch to deter,
let alone defeat, an aggressor . fine watches . last week, in an
attempt to soothe europe's restiveness by giving its allies greater
responsibility for their own security, the u.s . made its most serious
pitch yet to share the planning and control of atomic weapons in europe
with europeans themselves . before nato's 15member permanent council in
paris, president kennedy's special envoy, livingston merchant, proposed
creation of a multinational nuclear deterrent consisting of a fleet of
surface ships equipped with the u.s . polaris missile . key provision
of the plan is that the ships would be " multimanned, " i.e., their
crews would be drawn from every nato nation that would be willing to
help foot the bill . cost of the international task force would be
about $2 billion for 200 missiles and their floating launch pads ; it
would take at least three years to build, about half as much in time
and money as it would take to create a multinational nuclear polaris
submarine fleet . originally, in fact, the u.s . had hastily suggested
that multi-manned, multinational polaris submarines might be a logical
progression from the independent polaris subs that britain has agreed
to build (but has committed to nato) . apart from the cost, however,
congress has already indicated that it is dead set against giving u.s .
allies the components or know-how to build the submarines . moreover,
old naval hands are aghast at the prospect of manning submarines with
crews of mixed nationalities . warned a west german naval expert last
week : " sub crews are the fine watches of naval warfare . there can
be no room for misunderstanding . /
force or farce ? as for whose finger will be
on the trigger of the new surface fleet, the u.s . agrees that each
participating ally will have an equal veto . for all the argument it
provokes, however, the question of control is largely academic ; the
fingers would be unanimous . " do you really believe that europe will
want to shoot this thing off without being sure that the major u.s .
force would be used ? " asked a u.s . strategist . " considering it
as a second strike force, the semantics of voting becomes irrelevant .
/ seven nato partners britain, belgium, italy, greece, the netherlands,
turkey, west germany were immediately receptive to merchant's proposal
. west germany expressed the warmest interest ; the british looked on
the scheme with " mild benevolence . " but all seven wanted to hear
more about it, and allowed that the price was high and the payoff
distant . meanwhile, all but a fraction of the existing western atomic
stockpile would remain under u.s . lock and key . the proposal was
coldly received in france, where the gaullist daily la nation even
dubbed the prospect of a multilateral force " la farce multilaterale .
/ if the polaris plan had been touted as a significant boost to the
west's deterrent, the gibe might have been justified . as it was, the
joke fell flat because a jointly manned, jointly financed armada may
actually offer solid benefits for both the u.s . and europe . arts
course . for the first time, a multinational deterrent would allow
europeans to collaborate with the u.s . from scratch in targeting,
contingency planning and control of atomic weapons ; it would satisfy
their acute desire for atomic knowhow by giving them a thorough
education in complex technological and financial nuclear realities .
for both sides, it would provide an added, substantial token of
u.s . determination to remain in europe and defend its allies with the
ultimate
weapon, if necessary . says a u.s . defense planner : " this is one
thing that can put glue in the alliance . " as merchant prepared to
leave paris this week for a series of briefings on the plan in rome,
brussels, bonn and london, another u.s . diplomat pointed out an even
greater incentive to participate : " those nations that contribute to
this force will know more about the missile arts in a year than the
french do . /
