great britain the king's word the nazi duke of coburg made
several visits during the mid-1930s to his second cousin, britain's new
king edward viii . once, the royal cousins chatted " with pipe at the
fireside " in windsor castle, another time at tea in buckingham palace
with mary, the queen mother . the talks roused little interest at the
time, and were soon overshadowed by the melodrama of edward's
abdication in order to marry " the woman i love " the twice-divorced
american socialite, wallis warfield simpson . since then, the duke and
duchess of windsor, growing paler and frailer with the passage of
years, have drifted from portugal to the west indies, from manhattan to
paris . their pastimes have been the trifling ones of showing up at
balls, growing roses . is king here ? " but last week the
long-forgotten chats of the duke of coburg were making headlines in
london newspapers as the german aristocrat was also revealed as a
special emissary sent by hitler to britain because of his familial
connections with the royal family . the revelations appeared in the
latest batch of captured nazi documents published jointly last week by
the british, french and u.s . governments . coburg's " strictly
confidential " report was addressed " only for the fuhrer and party
member v . ribbentrop (no copy), " and said of edward viii that " for
him a german-british alliance is an urgent necessity and a guiding
principle of british foreign policy . " coburg eagerly suggested that
discussions about future relations be held between hitler and britain's
prime minister stanley baldwin . the king, said coburg, " replied in
the following words : " who is king here, baldwin or i ? i, myself,
wish to talk to hitler and will do so here or in germany . tell him
that, please . " britain's interests . the charge of progerman
sympathies has often been made against the german-descended duke of
windsor, most notably after the publication of other captured nazi
documents five years ago . the london daily express dismissed the late
duke of coburg's account as having no value as evidence because " he
was a nazi, spreading news he knew would be welcome in berlin . " but
the daily mirror's columnist cassandra seemed convinced of windsor's "
close and cordial relationships with the nazi regime . " at week's end
the duke of windsor, now 68, denied most but not all of the published
reports . " they give a generally false impression, " he declared in a
statement issued by his secretary in france, adding : " it must be
remembered that the duke, with the majority of the people who had the
interests of great britain at heart, was striving for some
understanding with germany .
