france the personal touch as other europeans railed against
charles de gaulle's vision of a french-led europe, many frenchmen last
week were uneasily contemplating de gaulle's influence on their own
society . since the november election turned the national assembly into
a virtual annexe of the elysee palace, de gaulle has ruled with little
parliamentary criticism and with only muted rumblings from france's
once rambunctious press . it has become clear that le grand charles has
established a personal regime in which, though it is not remotely so
autocratic a government as that of francisco franco, almost any
potential controversy is similarly quelled by the government lest it be
interpreted abroad as a direct expression of national policies . with
virtually unlimited powers under france's emergency laws, de gaulle's
government in recent months has : canceled the showing of a tv
documentary to mark the 20th anniversary of the battle of stalingrad .
prepared by the state-owned tv network, the film included a tirade by
nikita khrushchev that, in the government's words, was " violently
hostile to west germany and to the policy of franco-german
rapprochement . " same week, another documentary movie, death in
madrid, consisting mostly of stock shots taken during the 1936 spanish
civil war, was denied a license for exhibition in france or abroad
presumably for fear of offending franco . ordered the paris opera to
cancel a performance by rudolf nureyev, a russian ballet dancer who
defected to the west in 1961 . though nureyev has already danced in
paris, london and new york, the french government plainly felt that his
appearance in paris would be an affront to nikita khrushchev .
confiscated nearly 75,000 copies of a novel, high court, in which
right-wing author alfred fabre-luce gives a fictional account of a
future trial of de gaulle as it might be conducted if he were impeached
by the senate . the government's object this time was to avoid offense
to charles de gaulle himself . some of the government's repressions are
explicable as international backscratching . de gaulle's increasing
amiability toward spain has been rewarded by franco's jailing of six
top anti-gaullist terrorists who were hiding out in spain . banning the
stalingrad show may just possibly have been repaid last week when
german police failed to prevent mysterious french agents in munich from
kidnaping a top s.a.o . leader, antoine argoud (see below) . but it
seemed unlikely that khrushchev would care greatly if nureyev danced in
paris, or that adenauer would object to being damned by nikita on tv .
on the other hand, when a government is not subject to censure or legal
redress, who expects logic ?
