france l'affaire argoud a woman customer listened idly one
afternoon last week while a thickset, somberly dressed stranger used
the public telephone at la esmeralda cafe, across the square from
paris' notre-dame cathedral . " this is the s.a.o., " he barked . "
yes, the s.a.o . we're giving you argoud . he betrayed us, bungled all
the jobs he was supposed to organize, particularly the petit-clamart
affair . you can take delivery of him now . he's in a blue truck in the
alley opposite notre-dame . " minutes after the man hung up and strode
out, the square de l'archeveche started filling with french police .
just as the man said, a small delivery truck was parked in the alley,
and inside it the gendarmes found a gagged, trussed, middleaged man .
lifting the blindfold, a cop peered at the battered, bloody face and
nodded : " it looks like argoud . " fasching frawl . ever since april
1961, ex-colonel antoine-charles-louis-marie argoud, 48, had been one
of the terrorist secret army organization's top leaders . earlier, as a
sector commander in algeria, he was famed for his use of psychological
warfare tactics against the rebel f.l.n . an argoud specialty :
exhibiting in the streets bodies of executed moslem prisoners as a
warning . after leaving algeria, he grew a beard and shuttled
anonymously between italy, germany and switzerland . argoud had already
been sentenced to death in absentia for his part in the 1961 generals'
putsch, and, as a member of the diehard council of national resistance,
is believed to have ordered the attempted assassination of de gaulle at
petit-clamart, outside paris, last year . soon after the paris press
headlined the story of the arrest, l'affaire argoud was turned into a
first-rate international whodunit by the owner of munich's hotel eden
wolff, who said that the s.a.o . leader had checked in there the
previous night . three hours after he had registered, said the
hotelman, two men entered the lobby and sent a note up to his room .
argoud came down and spoke to his visitors, who showed him something .
all three started out the door together, but then argoud tried to pull
away . the other two grabbed him, hauled him out to the street, knocked
him down, threw him into an auto and drove away . at the height of
munich's riotous pre-lenten celebrations, any policeman might have
shrugged it off as just another fasching brawl .
legendary beards . as they read the headlines, parisians began to
question the official version that argoud had been betrayed by the
s.a.o . how had he been smuggled from germany into france ? was the
phone call really from an s.a.o . man ? could pierre chateau-jobert,
though supposed to be argoud's rival for leadership of the foundering
s.a.o., really have betrayed a comrade in this way ? the newspapers
plunged gleefully into the guessing game : argoud, they said, had been
captured by les barbouzes (the bearded ones), the legendary triggermen
of the french secret services . it was speculated that the esmeralda
phone call was simply the government's way of establishing an alibi
after its agents had illegally kidnaped argoud in germany .
argoud's attorney pointedly cited two
similar " illegal " kidnapings : that of adolf eichmann by the
israelis and, even more to the point, that of the emigre duke
d'enghien, who, suspected of plotting against napoleon, was snatched in
germany by french police and then tried and executed . whatever the
truth of the matter, parisians agreed that l'affaire argoud was truly
rocambolesque, incredible . to cap it, police last week rounded up nine
other s.a.o . men in a paris apartment, charged them with having
planned (though they failed even to attempt) the assassination of
premier georges pompidou last year . argoud's arrest had another result
: it caused a one-day adjournment in the trial of nine defendants
(time, feb . 22) accused of being part of the gang that tried to kill
de gaulle at petit-clamart . meanwhile, the government will seek to
establish that argoud was a member of the council of national
resistance, which ordered the ambush at petit-clamart, and the rest of
france will keep guessing who accomplished argoud's capture .
