india date with desai to india's able finance minister morarji
desai, austerity is a way of life . not only is he a vegetarian and a
teetotaler who fasts for a day and a half every week, but he is also a
hardheaded fiscal conservative who derides pie-in-the-sky welfare
schemes and is an ardent believer in pay-as-you-go financing . last
week desai presented the indian parliament with an austerity budget
that will put the entire nation on the desai standard . to finance
india's herculean task of equipping its armed forces against the
continuing threat of chinese aggression, desai boosted the budget by a
staggering 33 per cent to a record $3.8 billion ; defense expenditures
alone jumped 70 per cent, to $1.8 billion . but desai refused to
squeeze the money out of the government's costly five-year plan or even
to rely on large-scale deficit financing . the cost will be borne by
india's population whose per capita income last year was $69 . personal
income taxes in the lower brackets will be increased as much as 450 per
cent . import duties on most raw materials, machinery and manufactured
goods will be boosted from 15 per cent to 55 per cent . all of india's
taxpayers will have to deposit up to 3 per cent of their after-tax
incomes in government savings accounts ; businesses whose after-tax
incomes exceed 6 per cent of their capital value must pay a 50 per cent
tax on all subsequent profits . all basic household goods, cloth, food
and cooking fuels will be hit with new taxes . only exceptions :
sugar, shoes, rice and matches . adverse reaction to the budget was
surprisingly mild . some businessmen protested that desai could have
eased the tax burden by slashing unnecessary government expenditures ;
others pointed out that india might have been spared the crushing new
taxes if the government had spent enough money in the past to have made
a more creditable showing against the chinese . grumbled one : " this
is a high price to pay for ladakh even assuming we do get it back . "
but most indians closed ranks behind desai . said one government
official : " the budget is the clearest answer yet given by an asian
democracy to communist expansion . /
