denmark cutting back with krag
no ascetic is denmark's
premier jens otto krag, 48 . a dashing dane with a nose for opportunity
and an eye for pretty women, he has been married twice : first to
swedish actress birgit tengroth, currently to danish movie star helle
virkner, who has been named as one of europe's ten most attractive
women . in copenhagen last week, after only six months in office, krag
faced his supreme political test when he introduced into parliament a
complex series of measures that will 1) extend all union contracts for
two years, thus limiting wage increases ; 2) fix maximum prices of all
consumer goods except fish and farm products ; and 3) compel all
taxpayers to buy up to $290 in 4 per cent bonds that cannot be redeemed
for five years . a trained economist, krag insisted that his draconian
measures are essential ; more than any other nation in europe, denmark
had staked its economic future on joining the common market along with
britain . when de gaulle blackballed britain's membership, france's
president shrewdly promised denmark immediate admission . krag's reply
was sharp and to the point : " we have no wish to be one of president
de gaulle's pieces in the political chess game with britain . it is
important that we keep our two major customers, britain and west
germany, inside the same organization . it must be our purpose in all
fields to see that negotiations for a unified europe go on . " but
krag's loyalty to his friends abroad hardly allayed his headaches at
home . racked by severe inflation, denmark last year saw its trade
deficit dangerously increased to $486 million, while its currency
reserves were cut in half . in the last four years, danish wages have
risen 40 per cent , production less than 20 per cent . the stringent
new economic program drew anguished cries from employers and the
political opposition, but krag curtly rejected the traditional danish
compromise . krag's coalition government can undoubtedly squeeze the
bill through parliament by its usual one-vote majority, and the danes
will have to tighten their belts for years of austerity ahead .
