south korea over to you, gentlemen to all outward appearances,
south korea's ruling military junta has wielded iron-fisted control
over the country since it seized power in a lightning coup nearly two
years ago . under strongman general park chung hee, the government
stifled all opposition ; newspapers were gagged, and 4,000 known
political opponents of the regime were forbidden to criticize it in
public . but park has been less successful in quelling disaffection
within his own junta . last week the wrangling was out in the open,
threatening to plunge south korea into yet another full-scale
crisis . snooper boss . park's generals became openly restive soon
after his decision to restore civilian political rule (time, dec . 28),
at least in name . in fact, junta members planned merely to swap their
khaki for mufti and continue to run the country ; park himself was the
leading candidate for the presidency . this pleasant prospect was
shattered last january when brigadier general kim chong pil, husband of
park's niece and boss of the dreaded central intelligence agency, quit
the c.i.a .  in order to grab control of the regime's civilian
political organization, the democratic-republican party with park's
tacit approval kim whose 30,000 snoopers had kept  tabs on anything
and anyone the junta might distrust including members of the junta
infiltrated the party's power positions with 1,200 of his former c.i.a
agents., junta members objected to kim's power grab as a blatant
attempt to cut them out of the lion's share of the spoils . when they
insisted that park fire kim from the party leadership, park retaliated
by sacking four of kim's bitterest foes from the junta . but the four,
all high-ranking officers, threatened to plunge south korea into civil
war unless park brought kim to heel . " the entire army is against you,
one officer told park . " you cannot win . " failed objective . park
finally capitulated . he forced kim to resign his party post, last week
sent him on a 50-day foreign inspection trip as his " ambassador
plenipotentiary . " no sooner had kim left than investigators began
exploring rumors that he had used his powerful c.i.a . job to make a
stock market killing and to mulct kickbacks from government contractors
. before 3,000 screaming politicians in seoul's citizens hall, park
announced grimly that he was bowing out of the presidential race . " i
cannot help admitting, " he said, " that the revolutionary government
has failed completely in achieving its political objective the
emergence of new political personalities . " certainly, park's
withdrawal and kim's fall from grace failed to turn up any promising
new political leaders the junta-controlled democratic-republican party
is in floundering disarray while the three other major civilian parties
which are also riven by internal dissension, lack any broad base of
popular support . thus, few south koreans expect that park will remain
long in the wings . with inflation rampant and unemployment at a record
high, many politicians suspect that park is deliberately saddling them
with chaos, that in his own good time, he may once again " save " the
country .
