japan when they start playing footsie, it's time for a girl
to quit along the ginza, tokyo's garish main stem, a bar girl has to be
able to handle all types but even so, there's a limit . it came for one
ginza doll last week when, as she put it, " i felt something playing
footsie with me under the table . " said she : " i figured it was the
customer ; but the game went on after he excused himself . then i
looked down, and there was this huge rat trying to pry some meat out
from under my foot . sure, i knew we had rats, but when they get that
familiar, i quit . " melons & minks . they have been getting more
importunate every day . some 2,000,000 strong, twice as numerous as the
district's daytime human population, the ginza rat kingdom seems to
have been caught up in a revolution of rodent expectations . no longer
content with their network of underground rivers and sewers, armies of
rats now prowl the ginza every night after the cabarets have closed and
before department stores open . rats with affluent tastes gorge
themselves on such fancy groceries as melons, leather furniture and
mink coats . one gormandizing rat pack even held up construction of a
new building by chewing through a strong box and gobbling the
blueprints ; dim ginza bars have regular, unscheduled blackouts
whenever rats gnaw through power lines, a never-failing taste treat .
when a u.s . tourist was assured by the manager of a luxurious ginza
hotel that he couldn't possibly have seen a rat " as big as a cat " in
his room, the american bought a rat trap, showed up at the reservation
desk the next day triumphantly lugging a f-lb . rattus norvegicus .
last week tokyo's sanitation department joined forces with a passel of
private exterminators in an all-out campaign to keep the ginza for
people . with military precision, anti-rat guerrillas fanned out
through darkened department stores in stockinged feet, coordinating
their offensive by means of walkie-talkies . " this is c team calling b
team, " whispered one communications man to the unit on the floor below
him . " i hear rats on the eastern side of the floor scurrying down .
close door immediately . over . " meatballs & mikes . for weapons, the
rat hunters mostly used a supply of 300,000 poisoned meatballs about
one for every six or eight rats believed to be in the ginza .
exterminators bugged ratholes with tiny microphones so as to detect
enemy strongholds . they also planted extrastrong traps that are
normally used to trap mink since ginza rats are a special samurai breed
that can usually chew through a conventional trap . the hunters had no
illusions about their foe . " the ginza rats are terribly clever, "
said one old rodent fighter . " you can't just leave a meatball by a
rathole and expect them to eat its much too obvious . what you must do
is put the meatballs in, say, a cardboard box with a little hole in it
. then the rat will eat it thinking it's something you don't want him
to have . " in three days, the exterminators had killed about 6,500
rats outright, and expected another 3,000 to die later as the poison
took effect . but each female rat can theoretically produce about 70
offspring every year . concluded one sanitation official : " what we
really need is the pied piper of hamelin . /
