west germany they are the product of a broker's home for many
germans, ash wednesday holds an extra measure of solemnity . it marks
the end of the gay fasching season, about the only time of the year
when a middle-aged widower or a plain, bespectacled spinster can break
out of the everyday litany of loneliness and who knows ? find true
love across a crowded beer hall . of those who were still lonely as
fasching ended last week, many would not wait for next year's
festivities ; they will turn instead to one of west germany's 200
marriage agencies, such as the booming " institute for elegant
individual marriage initiation . " chirped bonn marriage broker alice
paech on ash wednesday : " now it will start all over again . "
wagnerian supermen . for a " searching fee " that averages about $50,
buxom frau paech and other professional cupid chasers will methodically
remake the whimsical old game according to cold teutonic logic .
clients are interviewed for the necessary information background,
interests, social status, financial situation and brought together
through carefully matched briefing sheets . for about one in every
three couples she introduces, frau paech manages to find the right
combination, and collects a " success fee " equal to the searching fee
unless the happy couple forget to notify her that they are getting
married . west german papers are filled with such agency-placed ads as
/ a heart to give away am 39, 160 (centimeters tall), alone, not ugly,
but wearer of glasses, " or " hello, hello ! what young man between
35 and 45 would like to try his happiness with me ? " agencies make a
paunchy male sound like a wagnerian superman, a wilting wallflower a
paragon of charm and virtue . many agencies put love on a chain-store
basis, increasing the chance for a successful match by trading clients
among as many as 32 branches . drawing clients from every class and
profession, marriage brokers account for 60,000 to 80,000 marriages
every year . security first . today's thriving trade is the outgrowth
of a business that has had its greatest boom during the manshort years
following world war ii . the main reason for its growth, says an
official in bonn's family ministry, is that " there is a lack of real
social life in west germany today we have become a little selfish and
don't concern ourselves much with our fellow men . " known by the
unromantic name of ehlanbahnunsgewerbe literally, the
marriage-initiating business it has inevitably attracted many brokers
less interested in mating sould than coining deutsche marks . " there
are as many serious marriage agencies as there are cabinet members in
bonn, " a german magazine claimed recently . but the customers seldom
complain . most seek financial security rather than good looks . women
are particularly fond of men from the benelux countries, and are
especially leary of bakers, butchers and innkeepers, afraid that they
will ask them to help out with the business . and how about love .
love, " sniffs one german, " is for teen-agers and frenchmen . "
