yemen for allah & the imam from remote yemen last
september came word of a revolution that had toppled the centuries-old
dynasty of imam mohammed el badr . leader of the coup was colonel
abdullah sallal, 45, newly appointed commander of the palace guard, who
announced in the yemen capital of san " a that his troops had killed
the imam and were in control of the primitive, nebraska-sized country .
weeks later it was learned that badr had in fact escaped the shelled
ruins of his palace and taken refuge in yemen's rugged hill country,
whose warlike tribes have traditionally been loyal to the imam .
clouded claims . ever since, helped by money and supplies from the
uneasy monarchs of saudi arabia and jordan, the imam and his tribal
warriors have been inching doggedly back toward san " a . president
sallal appealed for help to egypt's gamal abdel nasser, an old friend
of the imam but an even more implacable foe of the oil-rich desert
dynasties who were helping badr . nasser rushed in egyptian troops,
whose soviet-made guns, tanks and jets make them the arab world's most
formidable fighting force . though the republicans had not in fact won
the whole country, the u.s . decided reluctantly last december to
recognize sallal's regime, having first won nasser's promise to
withdraw his troops . egypt's president has not only failed to honor
his pledge but has actually raised the expeditionary force to 23,000
troops on the pretext that britain, saudi arabia and jordan have all
sent in forces to help the imam . britain, which has not recognized
sallal, fears that egyptian penetration of the arabian peninsula will
isolate its oilfields and deal a crippling blow to its economy .
fearful lest the hot little war engulf the entire middle east, the u.n
. last week sent ralph bunche, a veteran middle east troubleshooter who
is trusted by both sides, to discuss a solution with representatives of
sallal and the imam ; from yemen he will go to egypt, saudi arabia and
jordan . the actual course of the fighting has been clouded by the
grandiose claims of both sides and the formidable obstacles that face
western newsmen who even try to get into yemen, let alone reach the
battle lines . one who succeeded was time correspondent george de
carvalho . from beirut last week he cabled his report on a 23-day trek
in which he crossed the peaks, plateaus and wadis from aden to the
saudi arabian border, traveling a total of 1,000 miles by camel,
donkey, car and shoe leather without once leaving royalistheld
territory (see map) . along the way, correspondent de carvalho was
repeatedly shot at by egyptian fighter planes, tanks, mortars, and
artillery, saw two of his six yemeni guards killed and one wounded in
battle . rifles & faith . the fighting is most intense in a 70-mile arc
curving around the eastern approaches to san " a . in most areas, the
royalists limit themselves to hit-and-run guerrilla raids, but here
they are taking and holding ground, attacking steadily and advancing on
a wide front . reports de carvalho : " the incredible fact is that the
egyptians are losing in yemen . ragged, barefoot yemeni tribesmen,
armed only with ancient rifles and faith in allah, are kicking hell out
of nasser's elite troops despite their overpowering soviet equipment,
overwhelmingly superior firepower, and unchallenged airpower . "
the war in yemen is being fought between
the 10th century and the 20th . the mountain tribes have no officers'
corps or noncoms ; they simply choose their sheiks and follow them
into battle . " we captured 14 field radios, " sighed prince abdullah
ibn hassan, 25, a cousin of the imam . " but none of my men know how to
use them . " nor can they use captured tanks or trucks, since none of
the tribesmen know how to drive . when they attack a tank, the
tribesmen first kill off the accompanying infantrymen, then often set
it afire with flaming corn stalks . the egyptians are restricted to the
few rough roads and depend on daily delivery of supplies, while the
royalists can fight anywhere . says prince abdullah : " all my men
need is bread and bullets . we will fight until we are all dead or the
egyptians are driven into the sea . we bow only to god . " plastered
skirmishers . yemen's roads and fields are littered with the remains of
dead egyptians left to rot unburied . " let the dogs eat the egyptian
dogs, " spat a tribesman . the few egyptians taken prisoner seem dazed
and dejected . private amer hussein bahid, 24, of cairo, was due for
for discharge
in january after three years' army service . instead, his company was
airlifted to san'a and rushed off to launch a counterattack at beit
miran . said he : " about 25 miles from san'a we were ambushed . my
company never got a chance to fight . in a few hours, more than 100 of
us were killed, and i surrendered . " nasser has apparently had to call
up the reserves . complained sergeant ibrahim mohsin alkati, 32, who
was a cairo truck mechanic before he was recalled to duty : " i didn't
even know there was a war on in yemen . i thought we were supposed to
help train the yemeni republican army . " one battle witnessed by
correspondent de carvalho was at el argoup, 25 miles southeast of
san'a, where 500 yemenis commanded by prince abdullah attacked an
egyptian position on top of a sheersided hill that was fortified with
six soviet t-54 tanks, a dozen armored cars and entrenched machine guns
. the yemenis, advancing in a thin skirmish line, were plastered by
artillery, mortars and strafing planes . they could reply only with
rifles, one mortar with 20 rounds, and a bazooka with four rounds
handled by a man who had never fired a bazooka before in his life . the
fight for el argoup lasted a week and ended in a rout that cost the
egyptians three tanks, seven armored cars and 160 dead . de carvalho
asked a haggard sheik if his men suffered from battle fatigue . the
sheik frowned : " we suffer from many diseases in yemen, but battle
fatigue what is that ? " the tribesmen's loyalty to the imam is not
always easy to understand . many of the present royalist leaders
suffered cruelly during the 14-year reign of badr's father, ahmad the
devil, whose way of pacifying the hill tribes was to take mass hostages
and behead restive sheiks . shrugged one sheik : " the imams have
ruled us for a thousand years . some were good and some bad . we killed
the bad ones sooner or later, and we prospered under the good ones . "
another reason for fighting the republicans is that the hill tribes
belong to the moslem shia sect, of which the imam is the religious head
. the yemenis of the coast and the south belong to the rival sunni sect
(as do most egyptians) . though president sallal is himself a mountain
shia, it is his misfortune to be fighting the fierce mountain shias
with lowland sunnis who have never been famed for martial prowess . the
imam mohammed el badr is a husky, hard-looking man of 36 who roves
constantly along the northwest front in a dodge wagon and never sleeps
more than two nights in the same place . in a wadi under the stars one
night, he told de carvalho :. " nasser's biggest single target in
yemen is me . " waving at the skies from which egyptian jets had
pounced on his forces only that day, he sighed : " now i'm getting my
reward for befriending nasser . we were brothers, but when i refused to
become his stooge, he used sallal against me . i will never stop
fighting . i will never go into exile . win or lose, my grave will be
here . " by last week the war seemed deadlocked . however, imam
mohammed is trying to recruit a mercenary air force, and is building up
a small stock of antitank guns, recoilless rifles and mortars . saudi
arabia, which has bankrolled the royalists so far with about $15
million, is itching to plunge into the fight . in the wake of repeated
bombings of saudi towns, saudi arabia's premier prince feisal warned
u.s . diplomats : " i cannot sit much longer with my arms folded while
nasser attacks not only my neighbor yemen but also my own country . "
